Gorillas can catch human colds and other illnesses.
A newborn Chinese water deer is so small it can almost be held in the palm of the hand.
Ostriches can run faster than horses, and the males can roar like lions.
A lion in the wild usually makes no more than twenty kills a year.
The female lion does ninety percent of the hunting.
The world’s smallest dog was a Yorkshire Terrier, which weighed just four ounces.
Turtles, water snakes, crocodiles, alligators, dolphins, whales, and other water going creatures will drown if kept underwater too long.
Almost half the pigs in the world are kept by farmers in China.
On average, dogs have better eyesight than humans, although not as colorful.
Deer have no gall bladders.
There is an average of 50,000 spiders per acre in green areas.
Snakes are carnivores, which means they only eat animals, often small ones such as insects, birds, frogs and other small mammals.
In Alaska it is illegal to whisper in someone’s ear while they’re moose hunting.
The bat is the only mammal that can fly.
The leg bones of a bat are so thin that out of the 1,200 species of bats, only 2 can walk on ground. These are the Vampire bat and the Burrowing bat.
Some male songbirds sing more than 2,000 times each day.
The only mammals to undergo menopause are elephants, humpback whales and human females.
Blue-eyed lemurs are one of two (non-human) primates to have truly blue eyes.
A tarantula spider can survive for more than two years without food.
For every human in the world there are one million ants.
If you lift a kangaroo’s tail off the ground it can’t hop – they use their tails for balance.
If you keep a goldfish in a dark room, it will become pale!
Cows can sleep standing up, but they can only dream lying down.
The sentence “The quick brown fox jumps over a lazy dog.” uses every letter of the alphabet.
The average fox weighs 14 pounds.
The scientific name of the red fox is Vulpes vulpes.
Alligators generally live between 30 & 50 years.
A single elephant tooth can weigh as much as 9 pounds.
The turkey is one of the most famous birds in North America.
A housefly hums in the key of F.
During World War II, Americans tried to train bats to drop bombs.
Canis lupus lupus is the scientific name for a grey wolf.
To escape the grip of a crocodile’s jaw, push your thumb into its eyeballs-it will let you go instantly.
It is much easier for dogs to learn spoken commands if they are given in conjunction with hand signals or gestures.
Even a small amount of alcohol placed on a scorpion will make it go crazy and sting itself to death!
Male rabbits are called “bucks,” females are “does.”
The flamingo can only eat when its head is upside down.
Animals generate 30 times more waste than humans which is 1.4 billion tons every year.
Ants never sleep. Also they don’t have lungs.
A group of owls is called a parliament.
Just one cow gives off enough harmful methane gas in a single day to fill around 400 liter bottles.
Pear and apple seeds contain arsenic, which may be deadly to dogs.
Cows have one large stomach that is divided into four compartments to go through the different stages of digestion.
An anteater is nearly 6 feet long, yet its mouth is only an inch wide.
The blue whale weighs as much as thirty elephants and is as long as three Greyhound buses.
A herd of sixty cows is capable of producing a ton of milk in less than a day.
A grasshopper can leap 20 times the length of its own body.
At birth, baby kangaroos are only about an inch long – no bigger than a large water bug or a queen bee.
The smell of a skunk can be detected by a human a mile away.
There is a butterfly in Africa with enough poison in its body to kill six cats!
Cats have lived with people for only 7,000 years.
A black panther is really a black leopard.
The honey bee has been around for 30 million years.
The dumbest dog in the world is the Afghan hounds.
A cat has 32 muscles in each ear.
A dog’s shoulder blades are unattached to the rest of the skeleton to allow greater flexibility for running.
Tigers have striped skin as well as their fur.
Hippos can run faster than humans!
The Latin name for moose is alces alces.
The earliest European images of dogs are found in cave paintings dating back 12,000 years ago in Spain.
Baby horses can walk and run after just a few hours of being born.
The kangaroo’s ancestors lived in trees. Today there are eight different kinds of tree kangaroos.
A woodpecker can peck 20 times per second.
The great horned owl has no sense of smell.
Scientists have performed brain surgery on cockroaches.
The flea can jump up to 200 times its own height. This is equal to a man jumping the Empire State Building in New York.
Most elephants weigh less than the tongue of a blue whale.
The very first bomb that the Allies dropped on Berlin in World War Two hit an elephant.
A garden caterpillar has 248 muscles in its head.
A moth has no stomach.
George Washington’s teeth were made of elephant ivory, and walrus tusks.
Reindeer milk has more fat than cow milk.
Goats and sheep are seasonal breeders.
An elephant can smell water up to 3 miles away.
Deer can’t eat hay.
A skunk will not bite and throw its scent at the same time.
In 2003, Dr. Roger Mugford invented the “wag-o-meter” a device that claims to interpret a dog’s exact mood by measuring the wag of its tail.
Every day of the year, 100 whales are killed by whale fisherman.
If you cut off a snail’s eye, it will grow a new one.
The ostrich has two toes on each foot which gives it greater speed.
Lonomia obliqua is the world’s deadliest caterpillar.
‘Jaws’ is the most common name for a goldfish.
The most dogs ever owned by one person were 5,000 Mastiffs owned by Kubla Khan.
On average, cows poop 16 times per day!
The phrase “raining cats and dogs” originated in seventeenth-century England. During heavy rainstorms, many homeless animals would drown and float down the streets, giving the appearance that it had actually rained cats and dogs.
The most poisonous fish in the world is the stone fish.
Killer whales are not whales at all, rather a species of dolphin.
Goats were the first animals domesticated by man in 10,000 B.C.
Dogs have sweat glands in between their paws.
The fear of animals is called zoophobia.
We share 70% of our DNA with a slug.
We share 98.4% of our DNA with a chimp.
Fireflies do not bite or have pincers. Fireflies are harmless, they don’t even carry diseases.
Chocolate, macadamia nuts, cooked onions, or anything with caffeine is harmful to dogs.
No two tigers ever have the same stripes, and this is how individual tigers can be identified.
The American Kennel Club, the most influential dog club in the United States, was founded in 1884.
The longest recorded life span of a slug was 1 year, 6 months.
A whale’s heart beats only nine times a minute.
Elephants are covered with hair.
A ‘haw’ is the third eyelid of a cat, which can only be seen when the cat isn’t well.
A python can swallow a rabbit whole and may eat as many as 150 mice in a six-month period.
The placement of the eyes of a donkey enables them to see all four of their legs at all times.
At birth, a panda is smaller than a mouse and weighs about four ounces.
Oysters can change from one gender to another and back again depending on which is best for mating.
The average length of a Giant Anteater is around 6 and a half foot (2 meters), although about half of this is their long bushy tail.
Hummingbirds beat their wings 60 to 80 times per second.
Only half of a dolphin’s brain sleeps at a time. The other awake half makes the dolphin come up for air when needed to prevent drowning.
Dogs have about 1,700 taste buds.
It takes 3,000 cows to supply the NFL with enough leather for a year’s supply of footballs.
The word “peacock” doesn’t actually apply to both the male and female birds. It’s only the males that are called peacocks, while the females are called peahens.
A rodent’s teeth never stop growing.
When young abalones feed on red seaweed their shells turn red.
Small quantities of grapes and raisins can cause renal failure in dogs.
The hippopotamus is born underwater.
Taurophobia is the fear of bulls.
A bat can eat up to 1,000 insects per hour.
One million stray dogs and 500,000 stray cats live in New York City metropolitan area.
You can tell a turtle’s gender by the noise it makes. Males grunt, females hiss.
An elephant’s trunk has around 15,000 muscles. 200 liters of water is drunk from it per day.
The most popular female dog name is Maggie. The most popular male dog name is Max.
A large group of goats is called a herd.
Squirrels cannot see the color red.
The average chicken lays about 260 eggs per year.
A starving mouse will eat its own tail.
Only 5 to 10 percent of cheetah cubs make it to adulthood.
Ferrets sleep around 20 hours a day.
Birds can recognize landmarks, which they use to help them navigate.
The starfish is the only animal capable of turning its stomach inside-out.
Male dogs will raise their legs while urinating to aim higher on a tree or lamppost because they want to leave a message that they are tall and intimidating. Some wild dogs in Africa try to run up tree trunks while they are urinating to appear to be very large.
Sharks have been around longer than dinosaurs.
About two-thirds of shark attacks on humans have taken place in water less than six feet deep.
Sharks are immune to cancer!
Worldwide, more people eat and drink milk from goats than any other animal.
Alligators cannot move backwards.
The most popular dog breed in Canada, America, and Great Britain is the Labrador Retriever.
The largest giant squid ever found weighed 8,000 pounds.
Approximately 100 people die each year when they are stepped on by cows.
A group of butterflies is known as a flutter.
The sperm whale is the loudest animal. Their clicks have been measured at 230 dB.
Hippo’s sweat is pink.
Whale milk is 50% fat.
In Croatia, scientists discovered that lampposts were falling down because a chemical in the urine of male dogs was rotting the metal.
In the Caribbean there are oysters that can climb trees.
The swan has over 25,000 feathers in its body.
The blue whale is the largest of all whales and is also considered the largest animal to have ever existed in the world.
Giraffes have no vocal cords.
Starfish have five eyes – one at the end of each leg.
There are almost 60 million dogs in the United States.
After eating, a housefly regurgitates its food and then eats it again.
A mole can dig a tunnel 300 feet long in just one night.
Back in 1924, a monkey was convicted in South Bend of the crime of smoking a cigarette and sentenced to pay a 25 dollar fine!
Flamingos are pink because shrimp is one of their main sources of food.
The Mayans and Aztecs symbolised every tenth day with the dog, and those born under this sign were believed to have outstanding leadership skills.
When a male tiger and female lion mate they make a tigon, when a male lion and female tiger mate they make a liger.
French poodles did not originate in France – they came from Germany.
The breeding age for male goats is between 8-10 months.
Elephants don’t drink through their trunks like a straw.
Baby whales grow to a 1/3 of their mother’s length in the womb.
Goats do not have teeth in their upper front jaw.
Goat’s milk is higher in calcium, vitamin A and niacin than cow’s milk.
Turkeys have a poor sense of smell, but excellent sense of taste.
Cats can hear ultrasound.
Tuna fish can swim 40 miles in a single day.
Bumblebees have hair on their eyes.
Penguins can jump 6 feet out of water.
Giraffe hearts pump twice as hard as a cow’s to get blood to its brain.
Blue whales have large enough aortas (the main blood vessel) for a human to crawl through.
Some dogs can smell dead bodies under water!
More than 45 million turkeys are cooked and eaten in the US at Thanksgiving.
Baby whales can gain up to 200 pounds per day.
Dogs have a wet nose to collect more of the tiny droplets of smelling chemicals in the air.
Cats have over one hundred vocal sounds, while dogs only have about ten.
Cat owners are 30% less likely to suffer a heart attack.
Barn owls hunt mostly small mammals such as the short-tailed vole.
A ducks quack does echo, it’s just almost impossible to hear.
A cheetahs lifespan is up to 12 years in the wild.
Shark corneas are being used in human eye transplants.
Dogs are about as smart as a two or three-year-old child.
Butterflies have their skeletons on the outside of their bodies, this is known as the exoskeleton.
Arachnophobia is the fear of spiders.
Polar bears are the world’s largest land predators.
Hippos attract mates by urinating and defecating.
Butterflies can only see the colors red, green and yellow.
Yellowtail is the general name for loads of different species of fish that have yellow tails or a yellow body.
There are roughly twenty-four thousand species of butterflies.
A dik-dik is a tiny antelope that lives in East Africa, Namibia and Angola.
Dik-diks weigh between three and six kilograms.
Female polar bears normally start having baby cubs at the age of four or five.
Fireflies are also known as lightning bugs.
Noctule bats fly before sunset, whereas Pipistrelles appear soon after sunset.
In general, Asiatic jerboas have five toes on their back feet and African jerboas have three.
Even though a polar bears average body temperature is 37°C; they don’t give off any detectable heat, so they won’t show up in infrared photographs.
Dogs can see better when the light is low.
Dumbledore isn’t only the Headmaster of Hogwarts; in fact a dumbledore is an old English term for a type of bee.
Most young fireflies feed on nectar and pollen, although adult fireflies do not need to eat to survive.
79% of pet owners sleep with their pets.
Two dogs were among the Titanic survivors.
Many species of owls have special feathers for flying silently.
An elephant can smell water up to 3 miles away.
The animal on the Firefox logo is not a fox, but a red panda.
There is only one pink bottlenose dolphin which has been discovered, in an inland lake in Louisiana, USA.
China has the most goats in the world, they have over 170 Million.
A chicken with red ear lobes will produce brown eggs, and a chicken with white ear lobes will produce white eggs.
One survey reports that 33 percent of dog owners admit they talk to their dogs on the phone or leave messages on answering machines while they are away.
The average dog can run about 19 mph.
The owl has a small brain.
Snakes do not blink.
A squid’s eye can get as big as a basketball.
A puppy is born blind, deaf, and toothless.
Agrizoophobia is the fear of wild animals.
There are currently over a million animal species upon planet earth.
There are over 70,000 types of spiders spinning their webs in the world.
If you have a fear of chickens, then you actually have Alektorophobia.
Dogs can see in color, though they most likely see colors similar to a color-blind human.
Dogs have lived with humans for over 14,000 years.
There are 3,000 kinds of lice in the world.
The life of a housefly is only 14 days.
The lifespan of 75% of wild birds is 6 months.
Denmark has twice as many pigs as there are people.
National Dance Like A Chicken Day falls on 14th May every year.
The sailfish can swim at the speed of 109 km/h, making it the fastest swimmer.
The crocodile’s tongue is unmovable, as it is attached to the roof of its mouth.
Greyhounds are the fastest dogs on Earth and can run at speeds of 45 mph.
The Basenji is the worlds only bark-less dog.
Goats are quite agile creatures and in some cases they can jump over 5 feet.
In 2006, 253 fish-species were listed as critically endangered.
The hippopotamus’s skin is protected by its own pink oily secretion known as ‘pink sweat’.
The Tyrannosaurus Rex went extinct 65 million years ago.
The Irish deer is the largest deer to have ever existed. It went into extinction approximately 7,700 years ago.
It costs approximately $10,000 to train a federally certified search and rescue dog.
The color red doesn’t really make bulls angry; they are color-blind.
A herd of unicorns is called a blessing.
The oldest recorded elephant lived for 82 years.
According to records there are 50 million monkeys in the world!
There are an estimated 400 million dogs in the world.
Goats were the first animals to be used for milk by humans.
The U.S. has the highest dog population in the world. France has the second highest.
There are over 2700 types of snakes in the world and they live in deserts, forests, oceans, streams, lakes.
Cows from different areas have a different moo accent.
The male goat is called a “buck” or “billy”.
The female goat is called a “doe” or “nanny”.
A baby goat is called a “kid”.
Dog nose prints are as unique as human finger prints and can be used to identify them.
Ailurophobia is the fear of cats.
Ichthyophobia is the fear of fish.
Female bald eagles are 25% larger than males.
Frogs don’t drink water. They absorb water through their skin.
Suriphobia is the fear of mice.
There are over 210 breeds of goats in the world.
A polar bear’s outer fur is called ‘guard hair’.
An adult lion’s roar is so loud; it can be heard up to five miles away.
There is a shark called ‘goblin shark’ which has only been seen around 50 times since its discovery in 1897.
There are approximately 450 million goats around the world.
Dalmatians are completely white at birth.
A beaver’s teeth never stop growing.
Apiphobia is the fear of bees.
The average dolphin eats one-third of its weight on food each day.
Goats and octopus’ pupils of their eyes are rectangular.
African elephants only have four teeth to chew their food with.
The scales of a crocodile are made of keratin, the same substance that hooves and fingernails are made of.
Crocodiles eat stones.
Crocodiles have brains no larger than a cigar.
Cheetahs were trained by man for hunting as long as 3000 BC.
Horses can’t vomit.
Both male and female caribou grow antlers.
Alternate American names for the Elk are the moose and the Wapiti.
A group of frogs is called an army.
Tigers can see 6 times better at night than humans.
Starfish don’t die of old age.
A male gorilla can eat 40 pounds of food a day.
A group of whales is called a pod.
Female harp seals get in groups to have their babies one mating season is over.
When giraffes age, their fur darkens.
Heron’s eggs have a greenish-blue pale color.
You are more likely to be killed by a champagne cork than by a poisonous spider.
All dolphins have a different whistle.
Scientists had to go 45 million years back in history to find the elephant’s oldest ancestor.
Tiger Day is the last Sunday in September.
There is no visual difference between male and female herons.
A full-grown bear can run as fast as a horse.
Hyenas regularly eat the faeces of other animals.
Frogs cannot swallow without blinking.
A giraffe has the same number of bones in its neck as a man.
Moose have very poor vision. Some have even tried to mate with cars.
The swan has over 25,000 feathers on its body.
African elephants have bigger ears than Indian elephants.
There is no record of a human being attacked by a healthy wolf.
Hummingbirds are the only birds who can fly backwards.
Dolphins can eat up to 30 pounds of fish a day.
There’s a spider in Brazil whose bites can cause an erection that lasts for hours!
There are no ants in Iceland, Greenland, and Antarctica.
Before they’re even born, sand tiger sharks eat their twin brothers and sisters!
Jellyfish evaporate in the sun. They’re 98% water.
Rooster is simply a male chicken.
Pikachu is a mouse type Pokémon.
Some lions mate over 50 times a day.
The Big Five is a group of animals of Africa: cape buffalo, elephant, leopard, lion and rhino.
The slowest fish is the sea horse, which moves along at about 0.01 mph (0.016 km/h).
Millions of trees are accidentally planted by squirrels that bury nuts and then forget where they hid them.
The lifespan of a bush baby is 14 years.
Koala fingerprints are so close to humans' that they could taint crime scenes.

Parrots will selflessly help each other out.

Prairie dogs kiss.

Ghost crabs growl using teeth in their stomachs.

The mantis shrimp has the world's fastest punch.

Female lions do 90 percent of the hunting.

Narwhal tusks are really an "inside out" tooth.

The world's oldest known breed of domesticated dog dates back to 329 BC.

The oldest evidence of domesticated cats dates back 9,500 years.

Puffins use twigs to scratch their bodies.

Bottlenose dolphins are even more right-handed than humans.

There's a kind of ant that only lives in a small area of Manhattan.

Cows painted with zebra-like stripes can avoid being bitten by flies.

Capuchin monkeys wash their hands and feet in urine.

Sperm whales in the Caribbean have an accent.

Some pigs in China are the size of bears.

Some sharks glow in the dark.

Some snails have hairy shells.

Cowbirds use secret passwords to teach their young.

Baby Tasmanian devils make life-long friendships.

A grizzly bear's bite is strong enough to crush a bowling ball.

Humpback whales use bubbles to hunt.

A housefly buzzes in an F key.

Moray eels have a second pair of "Alien-style" jaws.

Ducks can surf.

Slow lorises are the only venomous primates.

Pigeons can do math.

Zebra stripes act as a natural bug repellant.

Wild chimps like to drink.

Sea otters are adept at using tools.

Frogs can freeze without dying.

Male horses have way more teeth than their female counterparts.

Koalas sleep up to 22 hours a day.

A group of ferrets is called a business.

Octopuses can taste with their arms.

Dolphins have names for one another.

Reindeer eyes turn blue in the winter.

Giraffes have black tongues.

Alligators will let manatees swim ahead of them.

Sloths can take up to a month to completely digest a single leaf.

Adult cats only meow at humans.

Elephants and humans have similar self-soothing techniques.

Female bats give birth to babies that weigh up to a third of their weight.

Painted turtles survive winter by breathing through their butts.

Dogs have way fewer taste buds than humans.

Otters have the world's thickest fur.

Alligators can grow for more than 30 years.

A group of owls is called a parliament.

Snow leopards don't roar.

Axolotls can regenerate their parts.

A group of rhinos is called a crash.

Squirrels will adopt orphans.

Giant anteaters have two-foot tongues.

Cows have best friends.

Moths experience love at first scent.

Horses have distinct facial expressions.

Deer can run up to 35 miles per hour.

An octopus has three hearts.

Some worms can jump.

Crocodiles can live up to 100.

Ravens are masters of deception.

Rats laugh.

Tigers have striped skin.

Cats recognize their own name but choose not to respond.

 Cows produce more milk when listening to slow music.

 Butterflies taste with their feet.

The spur-winged goose's diet makes it poisonous.

Vampire bat saliva keeps blood from clotting.

Wombat poop is cube-shaped.

Giraffes with darker spots are more dominant.

Orcas can learn to speak dolphin.

Queen mole rats make other female mole rats infertile.

Horned lizards squirt blood from their eyes.

Catfish have taught themselves how to kill pigeons.

Primitive crocodiles could gallop.

A hundred years ago

there were one and a half billion people on Earth.

Now, over six billion crowd our fragile planet.

But even so, there are still places barely touched by humanity.

This series will take to the last wildernesses

and show you the planet and its wildlife

as you have never seen them before.

Imagine our world without sun.

Male Emperor Penguins are facing the nearest that exists on planet Earth -

winter in Antarctica.

It's continuously dark

and temperatures drop to minus seventy degrees centigrade.

The penguins stay when all other creatures have fled

because each guards a treasure:

A single egg rested on the top of its feet

and kept warm beneath the downy bulge of its stomach.

There is no food and no water for them,

and they will not see the sun again for four months.

Surely no greater ordeal is faced by any animal.

As the sun departs from the Antarctic

it lightens the skies in the far north.

It's March

and light returns to the high Arctic,

sweeping away four months of darkness.

A polar bear stirs.

She has been in her den the whole winter.

Her emergence marks the beginning of spring.

After months of confinement underground

she toboggans down the slope.

Perhaps to clean her fur,

perhaps for sheer joy.

Her cubs gaze out of their bright new world

for the very first time.

The female calls them,

but this steep slope is not the easiest place to take your first steps.

But they are hungry

and eager to reach their mother,

who's delayed feeding them on this special day.

Now she lures them with the promise of milk,

the only food the cubs have known since they were born

deaf and blind beneath the snow some two months ago.

Their mother has not eaten for five months

and has lost half her body weight.

Now she converts the last of her fat reserves into milk for her cubs.

The spring sun brings warmth

but also a problem for the mother.

It starts to melt the sea ice.

That is where she hunts for the seal she needs to feed her cubs.

And she must get there before the ice breaks up.

For now though it's still minus thirty degrees

and the cubs must have the shelter of the den.

It's six days since the bears emerged

and spring is advancing rapidly.

But even now blizzards can strike without warning.

Being so small,

the cubs are easily chilled and they will be more comfortable resting in the den.

But their mother must keep them out and active.

She's becoming weak from hunger

and there's no food on these nursery slopes.

The sea ice still holds firm,

but it won't last much longer.

Day 10,

and the mother has led her cubs a mile from the den.

It's time to put them to the test.

They've grown enormously in confidence,

but they don't have their mother's sense of urgency.

At last it seems that they're ready for their journey

and they're only just in time,

for a few miles from the coast the ice is already splitting.

Now the mother can start hunting for the seals they must have,

but she's leading her cubs into a dangerous new world.

Nearly half of all cubs die in their first year out on the ice.

Summer brings 24 hours of sunlight

and the thawing shifting landscape.

Further south the winter snows have almost cleared from the Arctic tundra.

Northern Canada's wild frontier.

Here nature stages one of her greatest dramas -

Every year three million caribou migrate across the Arctic tundra.

The immensity of the herd can only be properly appreciated from the air.

Some herds travel over 2,000 miles a year in search of fresh pastures.

This is the longest overland migration made by any animal.

They're constantly on the move.

Newborn calves have to be up and running the day they are born.

But the vast herds do not travel alone.

Wolves.

Packs of them, eight to ten strong, shadow the migration.

And they are hungry.

It's the newly born calves that they are after.

Running directly at the herd is a ploy to generate panic.

The herd breaks up

and now it's easier to target an individual.

In the chaos a calf is separated from its mother.

The calf is young,

but it can outrun the wolf if only it manages to keep its footing.

At this stage the odds are even -

either the caribou will make a mistake

or after a mile the wolf will give up.

Midsummer on the tundra

and the sun does not set.

At these latitudes the sun's rays are glancing

and not enough of their energy reaches the ground

to enable trees to grow.

You'll need to travel 500 miles south from here

before that is possible.

These stunted shrubs mark the tree line -

the beginning of the boreal forest -

the taiga.

The needle-shaped leaves of the conifers are virtually inedible

so this forest supports very little animal life.

It's a silent place

where the snow is unmarked by footprints.

In the Arctic winter

snow forms a continuous blanket across the land.

But as spring creeps up from the south

the taiga is unveiled.

This vast forest circling the globe

contains a third of all the trees on Earth

and produces so much oxygen

it changes the composition of the atmosphere.

As we travel south

so the sun's influence grows stronger

and at 50 degrees of latitude a radical transformation begins.

Summers here are long enough for broadleaf trees to replace conifers.

Broadleaves are much easier to eat and digest

so now animals can collect their share of the energy

that has come from the sun.

It's summer

and these forests are bustling with life.

But the good times will not last.

Broad leaves must be shed in winter for their damage by frost.

As they disappear,

so the land becomes barren with little for animals to eat.

The inhabitants must migrate,

hibernate,

or face months of near starvation.

The Amur leopard -

the rarest cat in the world.

Here, in the deciduous forests of eastern Russia

the winter makes hunting very difficult.

Pray animals are scarce,

and there's no concealing vegetation.

The cub is a year old and still dependent on its mother.

Deer are frequent casualties of the harsh winter

and these leopards are not above scavenging from a corpse.

African leopards could never survive here,

but the Russian cats have thick fur to shield them from the cold.

There are only forty Amur leopards left in the wild

and that number is falling.

Like so many creatures,

the cats have been pushed to the very edge of extinction

by hunting and the destruction of their habitat.

The Amur leopard symbolizes the fragility of our natural heritage.

The future of an entire species hangs on survival

of a tiny number of mothers like this one.

All animals, rare or common,

ultimately depend for their energy on the sun.

In Japan the arrival of the cherry blossom

announces the beginning of spring.

The sun's energy brings color to the landscape.

The earth, as it makes its annual journey around the sun,

spins on a tilted axis.

And it's this tilt that creates the seasons.

The advance of the seasons brings constant change.

As the sun's influence diminishes in the north,

so the deciduous forests of America begin to shut down

losing their leaves in preparation for the dark cold months ahead.

One season hands over to another.

Some organisms thrive on decay,

but most must make special preparations for winter

and a life with little sun.

Whole populations of animals

are now forced to travel great distances in pursuit of food and warmth.

300,000 Baikal teal gather to escape from the Siberian winter

by migrating south to Korea -

the world's entire population in a single flock.

But there are parts of the world that have no seasons.

In the tropics the sun's rays strike the earth head on

and their strength is more or less constant all year round.

That is why the jungle grows so vigorously

and supports so much life.

This forest covers only 3 percent of the planet's surface,

but it contains more than 50 percent of all its plants and animals.

The canopy is particularly rich.

There are monkeys, birds

and millions of species of insects,

exactly how many we have no idea.

The character of the forest changes as we descend,

becoming ever darker and damper,

favoring different kinds of animals and plants.

Less than 2 percent of the sunlight reaches the floor,

but even here there is extraordinary variety.

In the great island of New Guinea

there are 42 different species of birds of paradise,

each more bizarre than the last.

This forest is so rich

that nourishing food can be gathered very quickly.

That leaves the male six-plumed bird of paradise

with time to concentrate on other matters

like tidying up his display area.

Everything must be spick and span.

All is ready.

Very impressive,

but no one is watching.

The superb bird of paradise calls to attract a female.

And he has more luck.

But what does he have to do to really impress her?

She retires to consider her verdict.

It's hard not to feel deflated

when even your best isn't good enough.

The sun influences life in the oceans just as it does on land.

Its richest parts are those where waves and currents

bring fertilizing nutrients to surface waters

that are bathed in sunlight.

The seas off the Cape in South Africa have this magic recipe

and are hugely productive.

Summer is the time of plenty

and it's now that the seals start to breed.

The strike of a great white shark lasts a mere second.

Slowing it down forty times reveals the technique

and immense strength of this massive predator.

If surprise fails,

there will be a chase.

The shark is faster on a straight course

but it can't turn as sharply as the seal,

its agility versus power.

Once the seals have finished breeding

the giant sharks will move on.

It's now becoming clear

that great whites migrate thousands of miles across the oceans

to harvest seasonal abundances in different seas.

The sun, beating down on tropical waters,

powers the weather systems of the globe.

Moisture evaporates from the warming ocean

and rises to create great storms.

The winds generated out at sea

sweep inland across the continents.

As they travel across the Sahara

they create the biggest of all sand storms

blowing sand halfway round the world

to fertilize the Amazon jungle.

Winds blowing across the Indian Ocean

collect moisture and sweep northwards towards the Himalayas.

As the air rises, so it cools.

The water it carries

condenses into clouds

and then falls as the life giving rains of the monsoon.

So air currents powered by the sun

carry wet air to the middle of continents.

Without water

there can be no life,

but its distribution over the land is far from even.

Deserts cover one third of the land's surface

and they're growing bigger every year.

This is the Kalahari Desert in Southern Africa.

It's the dry season

and thousands of elephants have started to travel

in desperate search for water.

All across Southern Africa animals are journeying for the same reason.

Buffalo join the great trek.

Nowhere else on Earth are so many animals on the move

with the same urgent purpose.

They're all heading for the swamps of the Okavango,

a vast inland delta.

At the moment it is dry,

but water is coming.

The travelers are hampered by dangerous dust storms.

Females and calves can easily get separated from the main herd.

For this pair sanctuary lies in the patch of woodland a few miles ahead.

They can't rest until they reach it.

The main has already got there safely.

Finally, the stragglers emerge from the dust.

The exhausted calf is still blinded by sand.

Its mother does everything possible to help it.

The storm is now subsiding,

but not all the elephants have been so lucky.

One youngster has got lost.

Thirsty and exhausted,

it follows the tracks of its mother,

but sadly in the wrong direction.

At the peak of the dry season in the Kalahari

water arrives in the Okavango.

It fell as rain a thousand miles away in the highlands of Angola

and has taken nearly five months to reach here.

The water drives out insects from the parched ground,

which are snapped up by plovers.

Catfish, traveling with the flood,

collect any drowning creatures the birds have missed.

It's a seasonal feast for animals of all kinds.

Birds are the first to arrive in any numbers -

wattled cranes,

then black storks.

Behind the birds come buffalo.

After weeks of marching their trek is coming to an end.

As the water sweeps into the Okavango

a vast area of the Kalahari is transformed into a fertile paradise.

Nowhere on our planet is the life giving power of water so clearly demonstrated.

The Okavango becomes criss-crossed with trails

as animals move into its heart.

The new arrivals open up paths like arteries

along which water flows,

extending the reach of the flood.

This is an Africa rarely seen -

a lush water world.

Some creatures are completely at home here.

These are lechwe -

antelope with hooves that splay widely,

enabling them to move its speed through the water.

For others the change is far less welcome.

Baboons are somewhat apprehensive bathers.

The water brings a season of plenty for all animals.

Hunting dogs.

These are now among the rarest of Africa's mammals,

but then nonetheless the continent's most efficient predators.

Their secret is teamwork.

Impala are their favorite prey.

They start to hunt

and the pack splits up.

An aerial viewpoint gives a new insight into their strategy.

As the dogs approach their prey

they peel off to take up separate positions around their target.

They seem to form a cordon around the impala.

Moving in total silence

they take up their positions.

Those ears can detect the slightest rustle.

The hunt is on.

Three dogs close in on one impala.

Missed.

The lead dog drives the impala towards the hidden flankers.

Anticipating their line

the leader cuts the corner

and joins a flanker for the final assault.

It's all or nothing.

One on one.

The dog has stamina,

the impala has speed.

Leaping into the lake is an act of desperation -

impala can barely swim.

The dogs know their prey must come out or drown -

now it's a waiting game.

The rest of the pack are calling.

They've made a kill in the forest

and this is an invitation to join in the meal.

The impala is in luck.

A pack this size kills once a day and everything is shared.

And this impala is reprieved.

The elephants are nearing the end of their long journey.

After weeks of marching they're desperately tired.

The matriarch can smell water

and encourages the herd to make one last effort.

The youngsters are exhausted

but their mothers have made this journey before

and they know that they're close to water.

After many hundreds of miles they've arrived.

The lives of these elephants are dominated by the annual rhythm of wet and dry,

a seasonal cycle created by the sun.

At the southern end of the earth,

after four months of total darkness,

the sun once more rises over Antarctica.

Now at last the Emperor penguins abandon their huddle.

The males are still carrying the precious eggs

that they've cherished throughout the Antarctic winter.

With the returning sun the eggs hatch.

Other birds have not even arrived.

But the Emperors by enduring the long black winter

have given their chicks a head start.

These youngsters are now ready and eager to make the most of the brief Antarctic summer.
Human beings venture into the highest parts of our planet at their peril.

Some might think that by climbing a great mountain

they have somehow conquered it,

but we can only be visitors here.

This is a frozen alien world.

This is the other extreme -

one of the lowest hottest places on Earth.

It's over a hundred meters below the level of the sea.

But here a mountain is in gestation.

Pools of sulphuric acid are indications

that deep underground there are titanic stirrings.

This is the Danakil Depression in Ethiopia,

lying within a colossal rent of the earth's surface

where giant land masses are pulling away from one another.

Lava rises to the surface through this crack in the crust

creating a chain of young volcanoes.

This one, Erta Ale,

is today the longest continually erupting volcano on the planet,

a lake of lava that has been molten for over a hundred years.

These same volcanic forces also created Ethiopia's highlands.

70 million years ago

this land was just as flat and as deep

as the Danakil Depression.

Molten lava rising from the earth's core

forced up a huge dome of rock 500 miles wide,

the roof of Africa.

Over millennia, rain and ice carved the rock

into a landscape of spires and canyons.

These summits, nearly 3 miles up,

are home to some very remarkable mountaineers -

Gelada baboons.

They are unique to the highlands of Ethiopia.

The cliffs where they sleep are for expert climbers only,

and Gelado certainly have the right equipment.

The strongest fingers of any primate

and an utterly fearless disposition.

But you need more than a head for heights to survive up here.

A day in a Gelado's life reveals how they've risen to the challenge.

For all monkeys morning is grooming time,

a chance to catch up with friends.

But, unlike other monkeys,

Gelados chatter constantly while they do it.

It's a great way to network while your hands are busy.

But these socials can't go on for too long.

Gelados have a busy daily schedule

and there's work to be done.

Most monkeys couldn't live up here.

There's no food and few insects to feed on.

But Gelados are unique -

they're the only monkeys in the world that live almost entirely on grass.

They live in the largest assemblies formed by any monkeys.

Some groups are 800 strong

and they crop the high meadows like herds of wildebeest.

The Gelados graze alongside Walia ibex,

which are also unique to these highlands.

These rare creatures are usually very shy

but they drop their guard when the Gelados are around.

You might expect that grazers would avoid each other's patch

but this is a special alliance from which both partners benefit.

It's not so risky to put your head down

if others are on the lookout.

Ethiopian wolves -

they won't attempt an attack in broad daylight.

But at dusk the plateau becomes a more dangerous place.

With the grazing largely over

there's a last chance to socialize before returning to the sleeping cliffs.

An early warning system puts everyone on the alert.

Their day ends as it began, safe on the steep cliffs.

The Ethiopian volcanoes are dormant,

but elsewhere others still rage.

Volcanoes form the backbone of the longest mountain chain on our planet -

the Andes of South America.

This vast range stretches 5,000 miles from the Equator down to the Antarctic.

It formed as the floor of the Pacific Ocean

slid beneath the South American continent, buckling its edge.

At the southern end stand the mountains of Patagonia.

It's high summer,

but the Andes have the most unstable mountain weather on the planet

and storms can erupt without warning.

Temperatures plummet

and guanacos and their newborn young must suddenly endure a blizzard.

Truly, all seasons in one day...

A puma -

the lion of the Andes.

Pumas are usually solitary and secretive.

To see a group walking boldly in the open is extremely rare.

It's a family - a mother with four cubs.

She has just one brief summer

in which to teach them their mountain survival techniques.

Rearing four cubs to this age is an exceptional feat,

but she does have an excellent territory,

rich in food and water.

Although the cubs are now as large as their mother,

they still rely on her for their food.

It will be another year before the cubs can hunt for themselves.

Without their mother's skill and experience

they would never survive their first winter.

Battered by hurricane force winds,

these slopes are now lifeless.

Further north, they hold other dangers.

Moving at 250 miles an hour,

an avalanche destroys everything in its path.

In the American Rockies

a 100,000 avalanches devastate the slopes every winter.

This huge mountain chain continues the great spine

that runs from Patagonia to Alaska.

The slopes of the Rockies, bleak though they are,

provide a winter refuge for some animals.

A mother grizzly emerges from her den

after six months' dozing underground.

Her two cubs follow her

and take their first steps in the outside world.

These steep slopes provide a sanctuary for the cubs.

A male bear would kill and eat them given the chance.

But big animals find it difficult to get about here.

Males may be twice the size of a female

and even she can have problems.

Her cubs, however, make light of the snow

and of life in general.

But the mother faces a dilemma:

It's six months since she last fed

and her milk is starting to run dry.

She must soon leave the safety of these nursery slopes

and lead her cubs away from the mountain.

If she delays, the whole family will risk starvation.

Summer reveals the true nature of the Rockies.

Stripped of snow,

the peaks bear their sculpted forms.

Only now can mountaineers reclaim the upper reaches.

Two miles up the crumbling precipices seem devoid of life.

But there are animals here -

a grizzly bear.

It seems to be an odd creature to find on these high rocky slopes.

It's hard to imagine what could have attracted it here.

At this time of the year bears should be fattening up for the winter.

Yet they gather in some numbers on these apparently barren slopes.

They're searching for a rather unusual food -

moths.

Millions have flown up here to escape the heat of the lowlands

and they're now roosting among the rocks.

Moths may seem a meager meal for a bear,

but their bodies are rich in fat

and can make all the difference in a bear's annual struggle for survival.

Another battle is being waged here

but on a much longer timescale.

These loose boulders are the mountain's crumbling bones.

The Rockies are no longer rising

but slowly disintegrating.

All mountains everywhere are being worn down by frost, snow and ice.

The Alps were raised some 15 million years ago

as Africa, drifting northwards, collided with the southern edge of Europe.

These spires are the eroded remains of an ancient seabed

that once stretched between the two continents.

But these are just the Alpine foothills.

The range at its center rises to 3 miles high

and is crowned with permanent snows.

The Matterhorn,

its summit too steep to hold a snow field.

Mont Blanc - the highest peak in Western Europe.

The distinctive jagged shapes of the Alps

were carved by those great mountain sculptors -

the glaciers.

Immense rivers of moving ice,

laden with rock,

grind their way down the mountains,

gouging out deep valleys.

They're the most powerful erosive force on our planet.

A moulin - a shaft in the ice opened by melt water

as it plunges into the depths of the glacier.

Like the water running through it,

the ice itself is constantly moving,

flowing down the valley with unstoppable force.

Alpine glaciers may seem immense,

but they're dwarfed by those in the great ranges

that divide the Indian subcontinent from Tibet.

This is the boulder strewn snout

of the giant Baltoro glacier in the Karakoram mountains of Pakistan.

It's the biggest mountain glacier on Earth -

43 miles long and over 3 miles wide.

This huge ice-filled valley is so large

it's clearly visible from space.

This is the greatest concentration of peaks over 5 miles high

to be found anywhere on Earth.

They're the most dangerous mountains of all.

K2 and her sister peaks have claimed more lives than any others.

The peaks here rise so precipitously,

the glaciers are so steep and crevassed

that few except the most skilled mountaineers can penetrate these ranges.

Markhor gather for their annual rut.

Males must fight for the right to breed,

but on these sheer cliffs any slip by either animal could be fatal.

A snow leopard -

the rarest of Himalayan animals.

It's a female returning to her lair.

These are the first intimate images of snow leopard ever filmed in the wild.

She greets her one year old cub.

Her den is well chosen.

It has exceptional views of the surrounding cliffs.

On these treacherous slopes

no hunter other than the snow leopard

would have a chance of catching such fragile prey.

A female with young makes an easier target.

Her large paws give an excellent grip

and that long tail helps her balance.

Silently she positions herself above her prey.

She returns with nothing.

Golden eagles patrol these cliffs in search of the weak or injured.

With a 2 meter wing span

this bird could easily take a young markhor.

Eagles hunt by sight

and the thickening veil of snow forces them to give up.

For the leopard the snow provides cover

and creates an opportunity.

The worsening weather dampens the sound of her approach

allowing her to get within striking distance.

It was an act of desperation

to try and catch such a large animal.

Wolves have made a kill

giving other hunters a chance to scavenge.

The worst of the blizzard brings success for the snow leopard,

but having descended so far to make the kill

she has a grueling climb to get back to her lair.

The cub must be patient.

It'll be a year before it has the strength and skill

to kill for itself on these difficult slopes.

The snow leopard is an almost mythical creature,

an icon of the wilderness,

an animal few humans have ever glimpsed

for its world is one we seldom visit.

The Karakoram lie at the western end of a range

that stretches across a tenth of our planet -

the Himalayas.

These, the highest mountains of the world,

like other great ranges,

were created by the collision of continents.

Some 50 million years ago

India collided with Tibet

thrusting up these immense peaks, which are still rising.

This vast barrier of rock and ice

is so colossal it shapes the world's climate.

Warm winds from India, full of moisture,

are forced upwards by the Himalayas.

As the air rises so it cools,

causing clouds to form

and the monsoon is born.

At high altitudes the monsoon rains fall as snow.

Here, at the far eastern end of the range in China,

one inhabitant endures the bitter winters out in the open.

Most other bears would be sleeping underground by now,

but the giant panda can't fatten up enough to hibernate.

Its food, bamboo, on which it totally relies

has so little nutritional value

that it can't build up a store of fat like other bears.

Most of the creatures here move up or down the slopes with the seasons

but the panda is held captive by its diet

for the kind of bamboo it eats only grows at this altitude.

But these forests hold fewer challenges for the more mobile.

The golden snap-nosed monkey, like the giant panda, lives only in China.

Their thick fur allows them to survive at greater altitudes than any other monkey

and when the cold bites they have these upper slopes to themselves.

Even if you have a warm coat

it apparently helps to surround yourself with as many layers as possible.

But at least these monkeys have a choice -

if they tire of tree bark and other survival food

they can always descend to lower warmer altitudes

and not return there till spring.

As the snows retreat

trees come into bloom.

Cherry blossom.

Rhododendrons -

here in their natural home they form great forests

and fill the landscape with the covers of a new season.

These forests are a host to a rich variety of springtime migrants.

Beneath the blooms - another display.

It's the mating season for oriental pheasants,

Himalayan monal,

tragopan

and blood pheasant.

Musk deer make the most of a short flash of spring foods.

This male smells a potential mate.

The red panda, rarely glimpsed in the wild.

It was once considered a kind of raccoon,

but is now believed to be a small mountain bear.

By midsummer its larger, more famous relative, has retreated into a cave.

A giant panda nurses a tiny week old baby.

Her tender cleaning wards off infection.

She won't leave this cave for three weeks,

not while her cub is so utterly helpless.

Progress is slow

for milk produced on a diet of bamboo is wretchedly poor.

Four weeks old

and the cub is still blind.

Its eyes do not fully open until three months after birth,

but the chances of the cub reaching adulthood are slim.

The struggle of a giant panda mother to raise her cub

is a touching symbol of the precariousness of life in the mountains.

On the highest summits of our planet

nothing can live permanently.

The highest peak of all,

Mount Everest, five and a half miles above sea level

and still rising - the roof of our world.

Of those humans who've tried to climb it

one in ten have lost their lives.

Those that succeed can stand for only a few moments on its summit.

The Nepalese call it 'a mountain so high no bird can fly above it.'

But each year over 50,000 demoiselle cranes

set out on one of the most challenging migrations on Earth.

To reach their overwintering grounds in India

they must cross the Himalayas.

By late morning ferocious winds are roaring past the peaks.

The cranes must gain height to avoid the building storm.

They've hit serious turbulence.

They must turn back

or risk death.

A new day

and a new opportunity.

The flock stay in close contact by calling one another.

Weak from lack of food and water,

they use thermals, rising columns of warm air, to gain height.

For many this is their first journey across the Himalayas.

For some, it will be their last.

The golden eagles have been expecting them.

The eagles work in pairs to separate a young crane from the flock.

It escapes the touches of one,

and is caught by another.

But even a young crane is a heavy prize

and the eagle has to struggle to control it.

The mother can wait no longer -

this is a desperate race against worsening weather.

The rest of the flock battle on.

In the ascent every wing beat becomes an exhausting struggle.

At last they are over the highest barrier that lies in their way.

But like all who visit the world of the high mountains

they dare not linger. Only 3 percent of the water
on our planet is fresh.

Yet these precious waters
are rich with surprise.

All life on land is ultimately
dependent upon fresh water.

The mysterious tepuis of Venezuela -

isolated mountain plateaus
rising high above the jungle.

This was the inspiration
for Arthur Conan Doyle's 'Lost World,'

an imagined prehistoric land.

Here, strange towers of sandstone
have been sculptured over the millennia

by battering wind and torrential rain.

Moisture rising as water vapour
from the surface of the sea

is blown inland by wind.

On reaching mountains,
the moisture is forced upwards

and as it cools, it condenses
into cloud and finally rain -

the source of all fresh water.

There is a tropical downpour here
almost every day of the year.

Fresh water's journey starts here,
high in the mountains.

Growing from humble streams
to mighty rivers

it will travel hundreds
of miles to the sea.

Angel Falls,
the highest waterfall in the world.

Its waters drop unbroken
for almost a thousand metres.

Such is the height of these falls

that long before the water reaches
the base in the Devil's Canyon

it's blown away as a fine mist.

In their upper reaches,

mountain streams are full of energy.

Streams join to form rivers,

building in power,

creating rapids.

The water here is cold.

Low in nutrients, but high in oxygen.

The few creatures
that live in the torrent

have to hang on for dear life.

Invertebrates dominate
these upper reaches.

The hellgrammite, its body flattened
to reduce drag,

has bushy gills to extract
oxygen from the current.

Black fly larvae anchor themselves
with the ring of hooks,

but if these become unstuck,

they're still held
by a silicon safety line.

There are advantages to life in the fast stream -

bamboo shrimps can just sit
and sift out passing particles

with their fan-like forearms.

Usually, these mountain streams
only provide enough food

for small animals to survive.

But with the spring melt here in Japan

monsters stir in their dens.

Giant salamanders, world's largest amphibian,

almost two metres long.

They're the only large predator
in these icy waters.

They begin their hunt
at night.

These salamanders have
an exceptionally slow metabolism.

Living up to 80 years
they grow into giants.

The fish they hunt are scarce

and salamanders have poor eyesight.

But sensory nodes
on their head and body

detect the slightest changes
in water pressure.

Free from competition,

these giants can dine alone.

Pickings are usually thin
for the salamanders,

but every year some
of the world's high rivers

are crowded by millions of visitors.

The salmon have arrived.

This is the world's largest
fresh water fish migration.

Across the northern hemisphere

salmon, returning from the ocean
to their spawning grounds,

battle their way
for hundreds of miles upstream.

Up here, there are fewer predators
to eat their eggs and fry.

A grizzly bear.

From famine to feast -

he's spoilt for choice.

This Canadian bear is very special -

he's learnt to dive for his dinner.

But catching salmon in deep water
is not that easy

and the cubs have lots to learn.

The annual arrival
of spawning salmon

brings huge quantities
of food into these high rivers

that normally struggle
to support much life.

Although relatively lifeless,

the power of the upland rivers
to shape the landscape

is greater than any other stage
in a river's life.

Driven by gravity,

they're the most erosive forces
on the planet.

For the past 5 million years

Arizona's Colorado river
has eaten away at the desert's sandstone

to create a gigantic canyon.

It's over a mile deep

and at its widest
it's 17 miles across.

The Grand Canyon.

This river has cut
the world's longest canyon system -

a 1,000 mile scar
clearly visible from space.

As rivers leave the mountains behind,

they gradually warm
and begin to support more life.

Indian rivers are home
to the world's most social otter -

smooth-coated otters
form family groups up to 17 strong.

Group rubbing not only
refreshes their coats,

but strengthens social bonds.

When it comes to fishing

there is real strength in numbers.

Fishing practice begins
when the cubs are four months old.

Only the adults have the speed
and agility needed to make a catch.

Adults share their catches
with their squabbling cubs.

Most otters are solitary,

but these rich warm waters
can support large family groups

and even bigger predators.

Mugger crocodiles, four metres long,
could easily take a single otter.

But, confident in their gangs,

the otters will actively harass
these great reptiles.

Team play wins the day.

The Mara river,

snaking across the plains
of East Africa.

As the land flattens out

rivers slow down
and lose their destructive power.

Now they are carrying
heavy loads of sediment

that stains their waters brown.

Lines of wildebeest are on their march.

Each year nearly two million animals
migrate across the Serengeti plains

in search of fresh green pastures.

For these thirsty herds

the rivers are not only
a vital source of drinking water,

but also dangerous obstacles.

This is one of the largest concentrations
of Nile crocodiles in Africa,

giants that grow over five metres long.

From memory, the wildebeest are coming

and gather in anticipation.

The crocodile's jaws
snap tight like a steel trap -

once they have a hold,
they never let go.

It took over an hour
to drown this full-grown bull.

To surprise their prey

crocodiles must strike
with lightning speed.

Here, only the narrowest line
separates life from death.

Most rivers drain into the sea,

but some end their journey
in vast lakes.

Worldwide lakes hold twenty times
more fresh water than all the rivers.

The East African Rift Valley
holds three of the world's largest:

Malawi, Tanganyika, and Victoria.

Lake Malawi, the smallest of the three,

is still bigger than Wales.

Its tropical waters teem
with more fish species

than any other lake.

There are 850 different cichlids alone,

all of which evolved
from just one single ancestor

isolated here thousands of years ago.

These two-metre wide craters
are fish-made.

Fastidiously maintained by the males,

these bowls are courtship arenas.

Cichlids are caring parents.

Brooding young in the mouth
is a very effective way of protecting them.

This lake can be a dangerous place.

After dark, predatory dolphin fish
emerge from their daytime lairs among the rocks.

Like packs of sharks,
they're on the prowl for sleeping cichlids.

In the darkness these electric fish hunt

by detecting distortions in the electric
field they create around their bodies.

Any cichlid that trenches out
will be snapped up.

The floor of Lake Malawi
drops 700 metres into an abyss.

Here, in this dead zone

the larvae of lake fly midges
hide out away from predators.

In the rainy season
they balloon up to the surface

and undergo a magical transformation.

At dawn the first adult midges
start to break out.

Soon, millions upon millions
of newly hatched lake flies

are taking to the wing.

Early explorers told tales
of lakes that smoked, as if on fire.

But these spiralling columns
hundreds if metres high

are mating flies.

Once the flies have mated,

they will all drop
to the water surface,

release their eggs and die.

Malawi may look like an inland sea,

but it's dwarfed
by the world's largest lake -

Baikal in Eastern Siberia.

400 miles long and over a mile deep,

Baikal contains one fifth
of all the fresh water

found in our planet's
lakes and rivers.

For five months of the year
it's sealed by an ice sheet over a metre thick.

Baikal is the oldest lake in the world

and, despite the harsh conditions,
life flourishes here in isolation.

80 percent of its species
are found nowhere else on Earth,

including the world's
only fresh water seal.

With this seal

and its marine-like forests of sponges

Baikal seems more like
an ocean than a lake.

There are shrimp-like crustaceans -
giant amphipods - as large as mice.

They are the key scavengers
in this lake.

The water here is just too cold for the bacteria
that normally decompose the dead.

Most rivers do not end in lakes

but continue their journey
to the sea.

The planet's indisputable super-river
is the Amazon.

It carries as much water
as the next top-ten biggest rivers combined.

Rising in the Peruvian Andes,
its main trunk flows eastwards across Brazil.

On its way the system drains
a third of South America.

Eventually, over 4,000 miles
from its source,

it empties into the Atlantic Ocean.

The Amazon transports
a billion tonnes of sediment a year,

sediment clearly visible
at the mixing of the waters

where one massive tributary,
the Rio Negro, flows into the main river.

Its waters are wonderfully rich.

To date over 3,000 species
of their fish have been described -

more than in the whole
of the Atlantic Ocean.

The Amazon is so large
and rich in fish

that it can support
fresh water dolphins.

These botos are huge -
two and a half metres long.

In these murky waters they rely
on sonar to navigate and hunt.

They work together to drive
shoals of fish into the shallows.

Botos are highly social

and in the breeding season
there is stiff competition for mates.

The males hold court
in a unique way.

They pick up rocks in their jaws

and flaunt them
to their attending females.

Maybe each male is trying to show
how strong and dexterous he is

and that he therefore is the best father
a female could have for her young.

Successful displays lead to mating.

Even for giant rivers like the Amazon

the journey to the sea
is not always smooth or uninterrupted.

Iguassu Falls on the border
of Brazil and Argentina

is one of the widest waterfalls
in the world -

one and a half miles across.

In flood 30 million litres
of water spill over every second.

All the world's
great broad waterfalls:

Victoria, Niagara and here, Iguassu,

are only found
in the lower courses of their rivers.

In their final stages

rivers broaden and flow wearily
across their flat flood plains.

Each wet season here, in Brazil,

the Parana river overflows its banks

and floods an area
the size of England.

The Pantanal -

the world's largest wetland.

In these slow-flowing waters
aquatic plants flourish

like the Victoria giant water lily
with leaves two metres across.

These underwater forests
are nursery grounds for fish.

Over 300 species breed here,
including red-bellied piranha

and other predators,
like the spectacle caiman.

Ripening fig trees
overhanging the water's edge

provide welcome food
for shoals of hungry fish.

The commotion attracts dorado,

known locally as the river tiger.

They patrol the feeding shoals,

looking for a chance to strike.

And waiting in the wings,

ready to pick off any injured fish,

are the piranhas.

The feeding frenzy quickly develops.

Piranha can strip a fish
to the bone in minutes.

Great numbers of fish
sustain vast flocks of water birds.

The rose-eared spoonbill is just one of the 650
bird species found in the Pantanal.

They nest alongside wood stocks
in colonies thousands strong.

Spectacle caiman linger below,

waiting for a meal
to fall out of the sky.

When rivers finally reach the sea

they slow down, release
their sediment and build deltas.

In Bangladesh the Ganges
and Brahmaputra rivers join

to form the world's biggest.

Every year almost 2 thousand
million tonnes of sediment

eroded from the Himalayas
is delivered to the ocean.

At the delta's mouth -
the largest mangrove forest in the world,

the Sundarbans.

These extraordinary forests
spring up throughout the tropics

in these tidal zones
where rivers meet the sea.

Crab-eating macaques
are mangrove specials.

In Indonesia these monkeys have
adopted a unique amphibious lifestyle -

they fish out fallen food.

The troop also uses the waters
to cool off during the heat of the day.

But the channels are also the playground
for restless young macaques.

Some of the young have even taken
to underwater swimming.

They can stay down
for more than 30 seconds

and appear to do this
just for fun.

Yet these swimming skills
acquired during play

will certainly be useful later in life
in these flooded mangrove forests.

In cooler climes, mud, laid down in estuaries,

is colonised by salt marsh grasses

and form one of the most
productive habitats on the planet.

400,000 greater snow geese flock to the estuaries
along the Atlantic coast of the United States

to rest and refuel
on their long migratory journeys.

This is the end of the river's journey.

Collectively they've
worn down mountains

and carried them to the sea.

And all along the way,

their fresh water has brought life
and abundance to planet Earth. This is our planet's final frontier.

An inner world, where only ...

the most adventurous dare to go.

Beneath our feet,

are countless miles
of cave shafts and passages.

The "Cave of Swallows" in Mexico,

400 meters to the bottom,

deep enough to engulf
the "Empire State Building".

This is the biggest
cave shaft in the world.

Yet these depths were
first explored ...

only 2 years before
man landed on the moon.

Today, caves remain
the least explored places on Earth.

However, human beings
are seldom the first ...

to reach these black, damp places.

Here, live some of the strangest
and least-known animals on the planet.

This galaxy of little lights is created
by thousands of living creatures.

Any animal that lives in a cave
has to cope with complete blackness.

But in New Zealand, some have turned
this darkness to their advantage.

A silicon strand is lowered
from the ceiling,

alongside hundreds of others.

Beautiful though these threads are,

they have a sinister purpose.

This is a cave glow worm.

To trap its prey,
it goes fishing with a line of silk.

The silk comes from glands
in the glow worm's mouth ...

and is loaded
with droplets of mucus.

Each glow worm produces
dozens of these threads.

Once its lines are set,

the glow worm hangs
from a mucus hammock ...

and waits, like a patient angler.

But the glow worm doesn't leave
everything to chance.

That ghostly blue light is the
result of a chemical reaction ...

taking place inside
a special capsule in its tail.

The light literally shines
out of its backside.

It's a lure for attracting prey.

Insects seem irresistibly drawn
towards the source ...

and then get trapped
by the sticky lines.

Once stuck,

there is no escape.

Now it's just a matter
of reeling in the line ...

and slowly consuming
the catch — alive.

By ensnaring the insects
that hatch in this cave,

these glow worms have solved
the biggest challenge ...

that permanent cave dwellers face —

finding a regular
and reliable source of food.

One kind of rock makes this whole
underground world possible —

limestone.

Most of the world's caves
are found within it ...

and it covers nearly 10%
of the Earth's surface.

Limestone is composed of minerals
derived from marine shells and corals,

so although this rocky escarpment
in the United States ...

is now hundreds of meters
above sea level,

it was actually formed under water.

The limestone towers
of Vietnam's "Ha Long Bay" ...

are a reminder
of this link with the sea.

Originally, this whole area would have
been one solid block of limestone,

the base of a coral reef.

In Borneo, rain has sculptured the limestone
into extremely sharp-sided pinnacles.

But the dissolving power
of rainwater ...

has other, much more dramatic
effects underground.

Rivers that flow over limestone
often seem to completely disappear.

When the water reaches the more
resistant bed of limestone ...

its course is altered.

Once underground,

the water takes on
a new, more erosive power.

During its journey
from the surface,

the water absorbed carbon dioxide
from the soil,

making it mildly acidic.

And over millions of years this
acid eats away the limestone,

creating a maze
of caverns and passages ...

that sometimes go on for miles.

This is the biggest underground
river passage in the world,

so big a jumbo jet
could fly through it.

It's "Deer Cave" in Borneo.

The sheer size of Deer Cave ...

allows some animals
to gather there in huge numbers.

A staggering 3 million
wrinkle-lipped bats live here.

The bats roost high
on the walls and ceilings ...

where they're well protected
from the outside elements ...

and safe from predators.

And while they're up here,

the bats produce
something very important.

This 100 meter high mound is made
entirely of bat droppings —

guano.

Its surface is covered
by a thick carpet of cockroaches,

hundreds of thousands of them.

Caves are one of the few habitats on
Earth not directly powered by sunlight.

In the absence of plants,

this food chain is based on a
continuous supply of bat droppings.

The cockroaches feed
on the guano ...

and anything that falls into it.

The droppings also support
other types of cockroaches,

which spend part of their day
resting on cave walls.

These in turn become food
for giant cave centipedes,

some more than 20 centimeters long.

Bizarrely,
there are crabs here, too,

sifting through the droppings
for nutrients.

All these animals spend their
entire lives within the cave.

They're totally dependant on the
digested remains of food ...

that's brought here from outside.

Each evening in just 2 hours,

3 million bats leave
the safety of the cave ...

to hunt for insects
in the forest outside.

But not all will return.

As they leave the cave ...

the stream of bats form
a doughnut-shaped ring.

The wheeling bats seem
to confuse a rufus-bellied eagle,

but they must still survive the attacks
of other, more specialized, birds of prey.

Peregrine falcons and bat hawks
are the jet-fighters of the bird world.

Good hunting will end
as the light fades,

so the bat hawks bolt
their catches on the wing ...

and fly straight back for more.

Any bat separated from the group ...

becomes a clear and obvious target
and is asking for trouble.

Yet the nightly onslaught has
little impact on bat numbers —

by the morning the vast majority
will be back in the safety of the cave.

Bats are not the only commuters
in these Bornean caves.

There's a day shift as well.

Returning from hunting
in the sunlight,

these commuters rely
on their loud clicks ...

to find their way through the cave
passages in total darkness.

They're cave swiftlets.

Like bats, they use
echolocation to navigate.

We need lights
to see what's going on,

but in the pitch black
the swiftlets manage ...

unerringly to locate
their individual nesting sites,

which are only
a few centimeters across.

It's a remarkable skill and one
we still do not fully understand.

These birds are unusual
for another reason.

Their little cup-like nests are
made entirely from threads of saliva.

It takes more than 30 days
to complete one.

The nests are very precious objects,

and not only for the birds.

For 500 years people have been
harvesting the nests of cave swiftlets.

It's a very risky business.

With virtually no
safety equipment,

and using ladders
made from forest vines,

the gatherers climb into the
highest reaches of the cave,

often more than 60 meters
from the floor.

The work may be hazardous
in the extreme,

but the rewards are great.

The pure white nests
of cave swiftlets ...

are the main ingredient
of birds' nest soup,

and gram for gram,
are worth as much as silver.

As soon as its nest is removed,
a bird will immediately build another.

So, as long as this valuable
harvest is properly controlled,

the colonies will continue
to flourish.

These Bornean caves are among
the biggest in the world,

and they're still
getting bigger ...

as each year rainwater
eats away a little more limestone.

But water in caves
doesn't only erode.

It also builds.

This water is loaded
with dissolved limestone,

and when it meets
the air in the cave,

some of that is deposited
as a mineral —

calcite.

As it builds up,

so the calcite forms decorations
that hang from the ceiling —

stalactites.

Each drop leaves behind
only a miniscule amount of calcite,

but over time the process
can produce some spectacular results.

If the water seeps
though the ceiling quickly,

then the calcite is deposited
on the floor of the cave ...

and that creates stalagmites.

Variations in water flow
and the air currents ...

produce an infinite variety of forms,
but all are created by the same process —

the slow deposition
of dissolved limestone.

And when stalactite
meets stalagmite,

a column is born.

Structures like these in
North America's "Carlsbad Cavern" ...

can take many thousands
of years to develop.

But sometimes, the formations
in a cave stop growing altogether.

These flooded caves in Mexico have remained
virtually unchanged for thousands of years.

Since the last Ice Age, they've become
cut off from the outside world.

Yet their impact on life
on the surface has been huge.

500 years ago, they supported one of
the world's great civilizations:

The Maya.

Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula has
no rivers, lakes or streams ...

so the Maya relied on the cenotes —

the flooded entrances
to the water-filled caves.

These flooded shafts are the region's
only source of open fresh water.

The cenotes are in effect,
gigantic fresh water wells.

Away from the life-giving rays
of sunshine,

one might not expect
to find plants.

But in the darkness
of the cave tunnels,

roots of giant tropical trees,

have pushed their way through
cracks in the limestone ...

to reach the flooded caverns.

Without this water,

the Yucatan's forest
could not grow so luxuriantly.

The Maya knew that their lives
depended on this water,

but it's only with the help
of today's technology,

that we've come to appreciate the
full significance and scale ...

of these flooded passageways.

So far,

more than 350 miles of underwater
galleries in the Yucatan ...

have been mapped,

but still nobody yet knows the true
extend of this subterranean waterworld.

And with good reason.

Underwater caving
is notoriously dangerous.

When the nearest exit may be
hundreds of meters or more away,

running out of air
down here would be fatal.

To avoid getting lost,

divers carry with them
a spool of string.

It becomes their lifeline —

literally.

The string also doubles
as a measuring tape —

a technique that has been
used here in Mexico ...

to chart the largest
underwater cave in the world —

all 100 miles of it.

Cave exploration often requires
you ...

to push yourself through
narrow gaps in the rock.

Cavers call such places 'squeezes'.

The tighter the squeeze,

the greater the chance of damaging
some vital life-support system.

In these conditions a diver could
easily become disorientated,

and that could be fatal.

The flooded caverns can play
tricks on you in other ways.

What seems like air,

isn't.

It's just another kind of water.

This is a halocline —

a meeting of fresh and salt water.

Fresh water from the jungle flows over
the heavier salt water from the sea.

The saltwater layer is extremely
low in oxygen ...

making it a particularly
difficult place for animals to live.

Yet some have managed it,

like the remiped, one of the most
ancient of all living crustaceans.

The Maya understood
the importance of the cenotes,

but they could never have known that
these flooded passageways ...

were actually the beginning
of subterranean rivers,

all of which eventually
flow out to the sea.

Salt water, unlike fresh water,
does not erode limestone,

so most sea caves are created by the
mechanical pounding of the waves.

The rocky outcrops of New Zealand's
"Poor Knight Islands" ...

are riddled with sea caves ...

and just like those in Borneo ...

they have become important shelters
for many species.

After a day feeding
in the open water ...

vast shoals of demoiselle fish
return to the caves,

which they use
as a refuge from predators.

For these fish, the caves
are a night time retreat,

but they're not
the only commuters in here.

There are other fish
working to a different schedule.

The big eyes are
the equivalent of bats.

Night feeders leave
the cave each evening.

And like all cave commuters,

they are most vulnerable
at the scheduled time of departure.

A bottleneck funnels these exiting
bats into dense concentrations,

attracting the attention of others.

The bats can detect the snakes
using echolocation,

but the snakes are literally
in the dark —

they can see nothing.

The strikes seem
to be largely hit-and-miss,

but the snakes have
a secret weapon.

They can actually sense
each bat flying past.

Receptors in the snake's head pick up
the heat given off by the flying bats,

as this thermal image shows.

To the snakes, the bats are
apparently glowing ...

and this gives them
something to aim at.

This is the price that these
cave commuters must pay ...

for their daytime sanctuary
on the ground.

Small wonder then that there are
other cave dwellers that stay put.

Many caves are like islands —

cut off from the outside world
and from other caves.

This isolation, has resulted
in the evolution ...

of some various strange creatures.

They are the cave specialists —

troglodytes, animals that never emerge
from the caves or see daylight.

These troglodytes from Thailand ...

are possibly the most specialized
creatures on Earth ...

for they live only
in cave waterfalls.

The entire population
of these cave angel fish ...

seems to be restricted
to just two small caves.

It's the same story
with other troglodytes.

There may well be less than a 100
Texas cave salamanders in the wild.

And the Belizean white crab
is another creature ...

that is unique
to just one cave system.

Living in perpetual darkness ...

they have all not only lost
the pigment in their skin,

but also their eyes.

It takes thousands of generations
for eyes to be lost,

so these species must have been
isolated for a very long time.

But the blind salamander has other
highly developed sensory organs.

Receptors in their skin detect minute
movements in the water made by its prey.

External gills help it to breathe in
water that is particularly low in oxygen.

The cave angel fish feed on bacteria
in the fast flowing water ...

keeping their grip
with microscopic hooks on their fins.

Food is often in short supply,

and troglodytes like the crab,

have to survive on whatever washes
into the cave from outside.

The salamander might not encounter
food for several months,

so when something does come along,

it can't afford to miss it.

It's astonishing that these extraordinary
cave dwellers manage to survive at all.

But one cave is so inhospitable ...

that one would not expect it
to contain any life whatsoever.

The water flowing out of the
"Villa Luz" cave in Mexico ...

is actually colored white
with sulphuric acid.

Explorers entering
this dangerous cave ...

must wear respirators
and carry monitors.

Poisonous gases rise
to fatal levels so quickly,

that an early warning system
is essential.

Bats survive by staying
close to the skylights,

but venturing deep into the cave
is very dangerous indeed.

The source of these toxic fumes
lies several miles below.

Hydrogen sulphide gas bubbles up
from oil deposits in the earth's crust.

It mixes with oxygen and the water,

and forms sulphuric acid.

These are not the sort of conditions
in which you would expect to find fish,

yet these cave mollies
seem to thrive,

despite the acid
and the low levels of oxygen.

There is, in fact, more life here
than anyone would think possible,

but the biggest surprise
is something altogether more bizarre.

These strange stalactite-like formations
are known, rather appropriately, as snotites,

the drops dripping
from the ends are sulphuric acid,

strong enough to burn skin.

The snotites are in fact,
vast colonies of bacteria,

capable of growing a centimeter a day.

In this world without sunlight,

these bacteria extract energy
from the hydrogen sulphide gas.

Bacteria like these
are known as extremofiles ...

because of their ability to survive
in such extreme conditions.

And these extremofiles play
another important role in this cave.

Surprisingly, they are
the basis of a food chain ...

which supports, amongst other creatures,
the larvae of these midges.

Villa Luz's ecosystem
was certainly very remarkable,

but cave explorers were soon to make
an even more astonishing discovery.

Beneath this arid landscape,
lies a subterranean wonderland.

Without water, one might not
expect to find any caves,

but beneath these rolling desert
slopes in the United States ...

lies one of the longest, deepest
and most surprising caves in the world.

Its secrets remained unknown
until 1986,

when cavers dug through
several meters of loose rock ...

to the bottom of this pit.

They named the cave 'Lechuguilla' ...

and since this discovery, more than 120
miles of passageways have been mapped.

When the first explorers descended,

no one guessed
at the sheer size of this cave.

But even that was not going
to be the biggest surprise.

Little did they realize
that Lechuguilla ...

would soon be regarded
by cavers the world over ...

as the most beautiful
of all caves.

They were about to discover ...

some of the most exquisite formations
ever seen underground.

The walls were covered with the
most delicate and fragile crystals.

Many of these crystals
were made of gypsum,

a mineral that comes
from limestone.

And there was mile after mile.

Water is the creator
of most caves,

but,
unlike all other limestone caves,

Lechuguilla's rock had not been
eaten away by running rainwater.

Something else was responsible.

The only water Lechuguilla has are
these wonderfully still clear pools.

As the explorers went deeper
into the cave,

they came across whole galleries
filled with the most unusual formations,

like these 5-meter cones,
frosted with the most delicate crystals.

It was Lechuguilla's
gypsum crystals ...

that made scientists question
how these caverns were formed.

They discovered, that
Lechuguilla's limestone ...

had actually been eaten away
by sulphuric acid,

cutting through literally miles
of limestone.

And when sulphuric acid
dissolves limestone,

it leaves behind gypsum,

the basis of Lechuguilla's
remarkable formations.

And there was one set,

more than a mile from the surface,

that almost defied belief.

The Chandelier Ballroom
was the ultimate discovery.

With its six-meter
long crystals ...

it's surely the most bizarre
cave chamber in the world.

And the walls had
one further surprise.

Extremofile bacteria were found
to be feeding on the rock itself.

The discovery of life that exists without
drawing any of its energy from the sun ...

shows us once again how complex and
surprising the underground world can be.

Each year, explorers chart over
a hundred miles of new cave passages.

But with half the world's
limestone still to be explored,

who knows how many Lechuguillas
are still waiting to be discovered? A third of the land
on our planet is desert.

These great scars
on the face of the Earth

appear to be lifeless,

but surprisingly none are.

In all of them life manages somehow

to keep a precarious hold.

Not all deserts are hot.

Fifty-mile-an-hour winds
blowing in from Siberia

bring snow to the Gobi Desert
in Mongolia.

From a summer high
of 50 degrees centigrade

the temperature in midwinter
can drop to minus 40,

making this one
of the harshest deserts of all.

Few animals can survive
these extreme changes.

Wild Bactrian camels,

one of the rarest mammals
on the planet.

And perhaps the hardiest.

Their biggest problem
is the lack of water,

particularly now, in winter,

when the little there is
is locked up as ice.

Surprisingly, snow here never melts.

The air is just too cold
and too dry for it to do so.

The sun's rays turn it
straight into vapour.

It evaporates.

But it is the only source
of water,

so Bactrian camels eat it.

Elsewhere in the world

a camel at a waterhole can drink
as much as 200 litres during a single visit.

Here the strategy is to take little and often.

And with good reason,

for filling the stomach
with snow could be fatal.

The camels must limit themselves

to the equivalent
of just 10 litres a day.

Winter is the time
for breeding.

This extraordinary performance
is a male Bactrian camel's way

of attracting the attention
of a passing female.

In summer the camels can't stray
far from waterholes.

But now, with mouthfuls
of snow lying everywhere

they can travel widely
in search of mates.

Today less than a thousand of these desert
specialists remain in the wild.

The Gobi, hostile though it is,
is their last stronghold.

There's no other desert
quite like the Gobi,

but why is this place a desert?

There is one simple
and massive cause -

the Himalayas.

Clouds blowing from the south
hit this gigantic barrier.

As they're forced upwards

so they empty their moisture
on the mountain slopes,

leaving little for the land
on the other side.

From the space
deserts are very conspicuous.

Dunes of sand hundreds of miles long
streak their surface.

With no cloak of vegetation
to conceal them

strange formations are exposed
in the naked rock.

Africa's Sahara is
the largest desert of all.

It's the size
of the United States

and the biggest source of sand
and dust in the entire world.

Sandstorms like these
appear without warning

and reduce visibility for days
over areas the size of Britain.

Dromedaries, single-humped camels,
take these storms in their stride.

The heaviest sand rises only
a few metres above the ground,

but the dust can be blown
5,000 metres up into the sky.

The ferocious wind,
armed with grains of sand,

is the agent that shapes all deserts.

Reptiles have armoured scaly skins
that protect them from the stinging grains.

For insects the bombardment
can be very severe indeed.

The only escape
is below the surface.

As the winds rise and fall, swallow and eddy

so they pile the sand into dunes.

These sand scenes can be
hundreds of miles across.

In Namibia the winds have built
some of the biggest dunes in the world.

Star dunes like these
can be 300 metres high.

Grains, swept up the flanks,
are blown off the crests of the ridges

so it's only the tops
that are moving.

The main body of these dunes
may not have shifted for 5,000 years.

Few rocks can resist the continuous
blast of the sand carrying wind.

These outcrops are standing
in Egypt's White Desert.

But they will not do so
for much longer.

They're being inexorably
chiseled away

and turned into more sand.

Now lumps of heavily eroded rocks
have been marooned in a sea of sand.

These jagged pyramids
a hundred metres tall

were once part
of a continuous rocky plateau.

The blasting sand will eventually
eliminate them altogether.

The relentless power of the wind ensures
that the face of a desert is continually changing.

But there is one constant presence -

the desert sun.

The sun's heat and power
to evaporate water

has had a profound effect on the bodies
and habits of everything that lives here.

This sun potentially is a killer.

And the red kangaroos
must acknowledge that.

Right now, while the sun is low,

there's no immediate cause
for concern.

But this situation won't last long.

Australia is the world's most arid continent
with blistering daytime temperatures.

Every hour the temperature rises
by five degrees centigrade.

Soon the heat will reach
a critical point.

Any kangaroo out in the open
is in serious danger of overheating.

In the full sun the temperature
on the ground soars to 70 degrees.

By midday the radiation is
so intense they must take shelter.

In the shade they're shielded
from much of the sun's energy

but their body temperature
can still rise.

So they lick saliva
on to their forearms

where there is a network of blood vessels
close to the surface of the skin

and, as the saliva evaporates,
their blood is cooled.

This thermal image shows
just how effective the process is.

The blue areas on the body
are the cooler parts.

As the saliva dries
it has to be replaced

and this is a real drain
on the kangaroo's body fluids.

Even in the shade
the earth is baking hot

so the kangaroos dig away
the warmed topsoil

to get at the cooler ground beneath.

By staying in the shade and licking
to control their body temperature

kangaroos manage to get
through the hottest part of the day

without heat stroke.

But for the majority
of desert animals

this strategy would not be
enough for survival.

The extraordinary ears
of the fennec foxes of Africa radiate heat

but the animals have
another way of keeping cool.

They spend their days underground

and only emerge at sunset.

Darkness brings huge changes.

In the Sahara the temperature can drop
as much as 30 degrees during the night,

so it's cool enough to allow
these desert fox cubs to play.

All sorts of creatures now appear

including some really unexpected ones.

Toads have permeable skins

and would quickly die from desiccation
out in the daytime heat.

It's only now that
they can leave shelter.

The same is true for scorpions,

even though their shells
are actually watertight.

In fact, most small desert
creatures are nocturnal.

so it's only now
that you can judge

just how much life
there can be in the desert.

But moisture, lost even at night,
has to be replaced sometime somehow

and that problem dominates
the lives of all desert dwellers.

The Atacama in Chile.

This is the driest desert
in the world.

Some parts may not see rain
for fifty years

and with such a record

you'd expect the place
to be completely barren.

These are South America's camels,
guanacos.

They're very good
at conserving moisture

but they nonetheless
need a regular supply of water.

They get it partly
from cactus flowers

but that explanation
raises another question.

How do the cacti
survive without rain?

Hot winds suck all the moisture
from the surface of the land.

Clearly there must be something else
that takes the place of rain.

The secret is a cold sea current
that runs parallel to the land.

The cold water cools
the moist warm air above it

and that produces banks of fog.

At the same time wind blowing
on to the shore sweeps the fog inland.

Before long the cacti
are dripping with dew.

The fog is so regular

that moisture loving lichens
are able to grow on the cacti

and they absorb liquid
like a sponge.

In the land of almost no rain

these precious drops are life-savers
for many different creatures.

Further inland the air remains so warm
that its moisture does not condense

so this slender strip of desert
is virtually the only part of the Atacama

where life can exist.

Without the fog,

this land, too, would be empty.

The guanacos make
the most of the dew

but it will not remain
for long.

In an hour or two
the sun will have burnt it off

and dry the surface of the cacti.

The Sonoran desert in Arizona
is not quite so dry as the Atacama -

some rain does fall.

But it is infrequent

and when it does arrive

animals and plants have
to be ready to make the most of it.

And it's coming.

When the summer monsoon blows in

the giant saguaros,
one of the biggest of all cacti,

are ready to take
full advantage of it.

After a rainstorm the saguaro's long shallow
root system sucks up the water

and the pleats on its trunk
enable it to expand rapidly.

When full, a saguaro stem can store
up to five tonnes of water

and that's enough to see it
through many months of drought.

The trunks of these huge plants
provide homes for the gila woodpecker.

But birds are not the only animals
to benefit from the presence of the cacti.

During four weeks of the summer

the saguaros bloom at night
to attract visitors.

The pollen and nectar
with which these flowers are loaded

attract long-nosed and long-tongued bats.

The bats left Mexico a few days earlier
to escape the heat of summer

and are on their way north
to the southern United States.

To get there, they have
to cross the Sonoran desert.

But the desert is so big

that for most of the year
they would be unable to cross it.

Now, with the saguaro in bloom,

they can refuel on the way.

So the saguaro's success
in developing a way to store water

is now crucial to most of the animals
that live or even travel through this land.

The scarcity of rain determined
the shape of this icon of the desert

but water, scarce thought it is,

has also, like the wind,
shaped the land itself.

In the deserts of Utah

ancient rivers flowing across sandstone country
steadily widen their canyons

until now the land between them
has been reduced to spires and pinnacles.

With little or no soil to retain
the water on the surface of the land

life here is scarce indeed.

And when resources are limited,

conflict is never far away.

These are Nubian ibex

and they are squaring up
for a duel.

And when trouble starts,

a smart ibex knows that the best thing
to do is to gain higher ground.

These are actually
subordinate male ibex,

but their fights
are nonetheless serious.

Losing one might mean
never getting the chance to breed ever.

When competitors are evenly
matched as they are here,

duels can last for an hour.

In this heat the effort
is trully exhausting.

But victory here will gain important
ranking points on a male's way to the top.

There's so much at stake

that not all play fair.

The battle has produced the winner,

but the ultimate prize
is not his yet.

That currently belongs
to the dominant male ibex.

His rank earns him the loyalty
of a harem of females

and they follow him closely
as he travels across this desert

searching for foof and water.

He doesn't have to waste time
looking for mates -

they're his for the taking,

so he can concentrate with them
on keeping fit and healthy.

Lizards are desert specialists.

But here, their numbers
are extraordinary.

These crevices in South Africa contain
the highest density of lizards in the world.

They're called flat lizards
for obvious reasons,

and they flaunt their multi-coloured
bellies in territorial disputes.

He's made his point,

and now it's time
to find some food.

As the day warms up,

the lizards move away
from their cracks

and head down
to the bottom of the gorge.

Their goal is the river.

There is no food at the edge,

but this desert river
holds a secret.

Each day blackfly rise
from turbulent stretches of the river.

This is what the lizards
have come for.

The black fly never land,

so the lizards have to leap
for their food.

In one day each of these acrobatic
little lizards may catch 50 flies.

There are plenty of flies
to go round,

even with hundreds of lizards
competing for them.

Away from these rapids flat lizard populations
are found much smaller numbers.

But here one unusual abundance
has produced another.

Deserts are created by the lack of water,

but what actually kills animals
here is not heat or thirst,

but lack of food.

So how on earth does
a plant-eater this size

survive in a place apparently
totally devoid of vegetation?

Elephants in Namibia
are the toughest in Africa.

And they need to be.

What little food exists
is so dispersed

that these elephants walk
up to 50 miles a day

as they travel up the dry river channels
searching for something to eat.

At times the task
looks truly helpless.

Elephants may seem out of place
in this landscape,

but they're not the only ones.

Amazingly, lions live here, too.

In savanah country huge herds
of games support prides

containing 20 lions or more.

But to live here
lions have had to change their habits -

prides are much smaller

and their home ranges
are very much bigger.

And there's an added problem -

their food is always on the move.

Like the elephants,

the lions must travel great distances
to find enough to live on.

But lions can't go everywhere -

they won't attempt to cross
this field of sand dunes

and the oryx know it.

The lions must wait for the oryx
to leave the safety of the dunes,

which eventually they must
to find food and water.

And then the lions
will ambush them.

The elephants have found
some of their favourite food.

Grasses are the staple diet
of all elephants,

but this herd concentrates
on digging up the roots,

which have more nutrition
and moisture than the stems.

It's the sort of behaviour

that can make all the difference
in a place of serious shortages.

Yet all this can change
in an instant.

The fortunes of many deserts
are ruled by distant rains.

This water fell as rain
in mountains more than a hundred miles away.

It's known as a flash flood

and called that because the water
may run for just a single day.

It's an event that only happens
once or twice a year at the most.

The sandy riverbed acts like
a giant strip of blotting paper

sucking up the water
as soon as it appears.

But every square metre of soil
moistened by this river

will increase the chances
of survival for those that live here.

Waterholes are filled
temprorarily.

Elsewhere in Africa
elephants drink every day,

but the lack of water here

means that desert elephants can only
refill their tanks once every four or five days.

Within a week the flash flood
has produced a flush of green,

more than enough to draw
the oryx out of the dunes.

It's a rare chance for them
to build up their food reserves.

The flood has made life easier
for the lions, too.

The flesh of this oryx will keep
the family going for a week at the most.

But for a while
the hunting will be easier,

now that river channel
has turned green.

The good times
for lions and oryx are brief,

but these are the short moments

that make it possible to live
in deserts the year round.

Death Valley is the hottest
place on Earth.

Yet even this furnace
can be transformed by water.

A single shower can enable seeds
that have lain dormant for 30 years or more

to burst into life.

And there hasn't been a bloom
like this one for a century.

The periods of boom
in Death Valley are short.

but they're just frequent enough
to keep life ticking over.

A sudden flush of vegetation is
what every desert dweller waits for,

and when it happens
they must make the most of it.

There is no other species
on the planet

that responds as quickly and as dramatically
to the good times as the desert locust.

Eggs that have remained in the ground
for 20 years begin to hatch.

The young locusts
are known as hoppers,

for at this stage
they're flightless.

They find new feeding grounds
by following the smell of sprouting grass.

Normally it takes four weeks
for hoppers to become adults,

but when the conditions
are right as now

their development switches
to the fast track.

As the vegetation in one place
begins to run out

the winged adults release pheromones -
scent messages,

which tell others in the group
that they must move on.

And when groups merge,

they form a swarm.

An adult locust eats
its entire body weight every day,

and a whole swarm can consume
literally hundreds of tonnes of vegetation.

They have to keep on moving.

The swarm travels
with the wind -

it's the most energy-saving
way of flying.

Following the flow of wind means that they're
always heading toward areas of low pressure,

places where wind meets rain
and vegetation starts to grow.

As they fly,

swarms join up with other swarms

to form gigant­­­ic plagues
several billions strong

and as much as 40 miles wide.

They will consume every edible thing
that lies in their path.

This is one of planet Earth's
greatest spectacles.

It's rarely seen on this scale

and it won't last long.

Once the food is gone,

the steady roar of a billion beating
locust wings will once again be replaced

by nothing more
than the sound of the desert wind. Both poles of our planet are covered with ice.

They're the largest
and most demanding wildernesses of all.

Nowhere else on Earth
is seasonal change so extreme.

It causes the ice
to advance and retreat every year.

And all life here is governed by that.

When the first polar explorers headed south,

giant cathedrals of ice marked
their entry into uncharted territory.

Passing the towering spires,

they must have wondered
what unearthly sights lay in store.

As they battled on,
the ice became increasingly dominant,

but nothing could have prepared them
for the ice world that finally loomed into view.

Terra incognita, ''the unknown land''.

At the southernmost extreme of our planet,

the continent of Antarctica is as large
as the United States of America.

Ninety per cent of all the world's ice is found here.

This frozen world is largely deserted
until the start of spring.

Adelie penguins in a hurry.

The clock is ticking.

Instead of waiting for the summer melt,
the new arrivals hasten south over the frozen sea.

They have come here to breed,
but polar summers are so short,

they must be in position before the thaw starts.

As the sea ice retreats,
life can journey farther south.

Antarctic waters are so rich that visitors come
from far and wide to harvest them.

Vast numbers of chinstrap penguins
come ashore to breed.

No bird will lay their eggs directly onto ice

so bare rock is a vital commodity.

The best patches are worth the climb.

The cliff tops are soon stained pink

with the droppings of tens of thousands
of nesting penguins.

0nly in a land almost entirely covered in ice
could bare rock be reckoned an oasis.

Some will travel
into the heart of the continent to find it.

These are nunataks,
the exposed peaks of vast mountain ranges

buried in ice over a mile deep.

The eerie silence here is only broken in spring.

The snow petrels have arrived and are courting.

Antarctic petrels now join
the most southerly bird colony on Earth.

The birds have flown inland
for over 300 miles to reach this breeding site.

0nce their eggs have hatched, they will be forced
repeatedly to make the 600-mile round trip

to gather food in the ocean.

First, though, valuable nesting places
must be defended from property thieves.

After laying their eggs,
the petrels take time out to clean their plumage.

The south polar skua is a formidable opportunist.

But the skuas have not chanced upon the petrels,

they've been waiting for them.

These birds do not need to go
to the ocean for their food.

The skuas can survive further south
than any other predator

by exploiting the petrels' desperate need
for bare rock.

Even at the height of summer, less than
three per cent of Antarctica is free of ice,

and nearly all of that exposed rock
is found in one place,

the Antarctic Peninsula.

Its long arm extends further north
than the rest of the continent,

so spring arrives here first.

The thaw unlocks sheltered bays

that provide refuge from the relentless battering
of the Southern 0cean.

In the depths, something stirs.

Humpback whales.

They have travelled over 5,000 miles
to reach these waters.

The whales are harvesting krill,

shrimp-like creatures that begin to swarm here
as soon as the ice retreats.

Diving into the heart of the swarm,
teams of whales spiral round each other

in close coordination.

Now they turn, blasting air from their blowholes,
and ascend towards their prey.

The krill becomes concentrated
as the spiralling net of bubbles draws inwards.

The team of whales work round the clock
for the boom is short-lived.

Summer is already fading

and the whales will soon
be forced north as winter returns.

The sun's influence diminishes
and the ocean starts to freeze.

The greatest seasonal change
on our planet is underway.

The ice grows at an extraordinary rate,
advancing two and a half miles a day.

In a matter of weeks,
the continent effectively doubles in size.

Life flees from Antarctica.

But one creature is just arriving.

Every winter, emperor penguins
leave the comfort of their ocean home

and begin a remarkable journey.

They head towards their breeding grounds,
almost 100 miles inland.

Eventually, the emperor penguins
reach the place where they were hatched,

an area sheltered by icebergs,
trapped in the frozen ocean.

Here they will raise the next generation.

But first, each must find a mate.

The males begin to serenade.

And if a female replies, they pair up,
posing like statues.

New couples quickly form a strong bond.

They seem oblivious
to the noisy crowd around them.

To cement their relationship,
the male steps out with his female.

The brief courtship complete,
there isn't a moment to lose.

With so much pressure to perform,
any male would struggle to stay on top.

Several weeks later, and it seems
that most couplings were successful.

But producing the egg has taken its toll.

The females no longer
have the energy to incubate.

The male takes over.

It's still minus 20 degrees centigrade,

so the transfer must be done quickly
or else the egg will freeze.

With no bare rock to nest on,
the male tucks the egg into a special pouch,

where he can keep it warm.

It requires an extraordinary piece of teamwork.

Driven by hunger, the exhausted females
now return to the ocean on their own,

repeating the epic journey they made
with the males only a month before.

Now the sun barely appears above the horizon.

As the days shorten,
its warmth is withdrawn from the continent.

With the females gone,
the colony undergoes a strange transformation.

The males shuffle into groups,

their eggs still tucked away above their feet.

They lock together in tightly-packed huddles
as they struggle to keep warm.

Speeding up the action reveals
how these huddles constantly shift and change

as each penguin works its way
towards the warmer interior.

Crammed into this scrum,
the birds are remarkably good-natured.

But they have to be.

If the huddle breaks, even for a moment,
precious heat escapes.

It's imperative they reform as quickly as possible,

for only by acting as one can the males
withstand the elements and protect their eggs.

But their greatest test lies ahead.

As winter advances,
frequent blizzards drive the temperature down.

It's now 60 degrees below zero.

The birds at the edge of the huddle
bear the brunt of the 100-mile-an-hour winds

and so provide shelter
to those taking their turn in the middle.

Abandoned by the sun,
the males are left alone with their eggs

to face the coldest, darkest winter on Earth.

At the northern extreme of our planet,
the sun rises for the first time in months,

illuminating a very different ice world.

Unlike Antarctica,
the Arctic is a vast frozen sea surrounded by land.

Here winter is coming to an end

but this bleak wilderness remains locked in ice.

Eider ducks break the silence.

They have stayed here,
braving the northern winter,

instead of flying south to warmer climes.

Flocks 40,000 strong
sweep across the frozen wastes.

They all have the same goal, a polynya,

a permanent hole in the sea ice,

kept open throughout the winter
by strong ocean currents.

This unusual duck pond
provides an overnight sanctuary

and, when day breaks, a rare chance to feed.

Just 10 metres beneath the ice,
the sea floor is carpeted with dense mussel beds.

These can only be reached
during a brief lull in the currents.

The ducks must quickly prise the mussels free
before the tide starts to turn.

The window of opportunity is short.

As the current begins to build,
it's up, up and away.

These permanent holes in the ice
provide seafood throughout the winter.

The diners attract others.

In the Arctic, any breach in the icy barrier
can be a lifeline.

Musk oxen create their own.

These giants have the strength
to smash through the frozen crust

to graze on the vegetation below.

The ice-breakers create an opening
for other over-winterers.

Flocks of ptarmigan make unusual
grazing companions for the musk oxen,

whose entourage grows throughout the day.

This odd assembly of vegetarians
doesn't go unnoticed.

An arctic fox.

The musk oxen have recently given birth.

For the fox, it's a chance to scavenge.

But half a ton of mad hairy cow
is not to be trifled with.

The calves are born well before the spring melt,

giving them a head start
when summer finally arrives.

It must get to grips with its new ice world,

benign one minute, life-threatening the next.

Even in spring, winds chill to the bone.

The calf must stay close to its mother
to avoid getting lost in the sudden blizzard.

Arctic wolves!

In the whiteout,
the threat is almost impossible to detect,

but the musk oxen
instinctively retreat to higher ground.

Forming a defensive ring around their calves,

the adults present a barricade
that few hunters could breach.

But the wolves need not risk injury today.

A calf has been left behind in the panic.

With each passing day,
the sun climbs higher in the sky

and its rays strike the Arctic more directly.

It's spring and new life stirs.

The polar bear cubs emerge from the den
in which they were born.

Their mother stretches her legs
after five months under the snow.

They are just two months old
and instinctively follow her lead.

A steep slope makes the best site for a den,
but it's a tricky place to take your first steps.

It may look like fun
but this is serious training for the task ahead.

There is no food on the slopes

and the family will need to head out
across the frozen sea

before the mother's milk runs dry.

Two weeks later, they are ready.

0ut on the sea ice, the female can hunt for seals

but it will take all her mothering skills
to keep her cubs safe

in this dangerous world of ice.

The annual melt has begun.

This is a challenging time for the bear family.

0ne out of every two cubs
do not survive their first year out on the ice.

As the sun's influence increases,
the sea ice seems to take on a life of its own.

Glacial melt waters pour from the land,
mingling with the sea

and speeding up the thaw.

The seascape is in constant flux

as broken ice is moved on by winds and currents.

The ice is becoming too weak
to support a male polar bear.

He attempts to spread his weight,

but the ice that has supported him all winter
is rapidly disintegrating.

Each year, as the climate warms,
the Arctic holds less ice.

This is a disaster for polar bears.

Without its solid platform,

they can't hunt the seals
they need in order to survive.

This may be a glimpse of the unstable future

faced by this magnificent creature.

As the ice disappears,
seabirds return to the high Arctic.

Little auks arrive in their millions.

In some ways,
these birds are the penguins of the north.

They seek bare rock on which to lay their eggs
and they look rather like penguins, too.

Unlike Antarctica, the Arctic
can be reached by land-based predators,

which is why little auks
have kept the ability to fly.

They use scree slopes to protect their eggs,
burrowing up to a metre beneath the rocks.

At the height of summer, the sun never sets,

but just skims the horizon before rising again.

Migrants return to the Arctic from far and wide.

They've come to make the most of the brief flush
of food and to produce their young.

Sandhill cranes have travelled
all the way from New Mexico.

Their chicks join the growing band
of youngsters exploring the tundra.

For a few months each year, the Arctic becomes
''The land of the midnight sun''

and 24 hours of daylight
allow animals to feed around the clock.

The arctic fox finally has enough food
to raise her large family.

If you choose to nest in the open,
you must be prepared for a fight.

Arctic skuas will see off any trespassers,
even large vegetarians.

The male polar bear's ice world
has finally vanished beneath him.

While the female is still kept on land
by her dependent cubs,

the male can take to the sea in search of food.

Ducking and diving, he hopes to ambush seals

resting on the remaining fragments of ice.

In these new surroundings,
he is a surprisingly adept swimmer.

0nce an extremely rare sight,

polar bears have recently been seen
over 60 miles from the shore.

There is now no turning back for this bear.

He is forced to head out into deeper water.

His giant front paws help him
to fight the ocean currents.

He seems at home in the sea,
but he cannot swim indefinitely.

He will drown if he doesn't find land
somewhere in this vast ocean.

Walruses are now gathering on low-lying islands.

They gave birth on the sea ice,
but with this platform now gone,

they need a new place
to haul out and nurse their young.

After several days at sea,
the male bear finally makes landfall,

drawn by the pungent smells
emanating from the island.

By the end of the summer,
the bear has lost half his weight.

With the ice long gone,
he is forced onto land in search of food.

There will be no easy meals on this island.

Walruses are the largest seals in the world.

They weigh over a ton
and are armed with tusks a metre long.

Exhausted from his swim,
the bear must regain his strength.

The next day, a sea fog shrouds the island.

The walruses sense that they are in danger.

Using the fog as cover,
the bear approaches the herd.

The adults close ranks around their young,

presenting a wall of blubber and hide.

He tests the barrier, but it stands firm.

It appears that the world's largest land carnivore
has met his match.

There must be a chink in the armour somewhere.

Not here!

This female walrus is shielding her pup,
if he can just prise her off...

The bear's claws and teeth
can't penetrate her thick hide.

With the herd retreating to water,
the bear must move quickly.

Having failed with one,
he heads straight for another.

The chance of his first meal in months
is slipping away.

He seems increasingly desperate.

It's now or never.

He must avoid the stabbing tusks if he is to win.

The flailing walrus is immensely powerful

and drags the bear away from the shallows
towards the safety of the herd.

It slips from his grasp.

0nly at the height of summer,

when bears are on the verge of starvation,
will they risk attacking such dangerous prey.

It was a gamble that this bear took and lost.

The stab wounds he received from the walrus
are so severe that he can barely walk.

The walruses are calm again,

seemingly aware that the injured bear
no longer poses a threat to them or their young.

Unable to feed, this bear will not survive.

If the global climate continues to warm,
and the Arctic ice melts sooner each year,

it is certain that more bears will share this fate.

At the southern end of our planet,
fiery ribbons are illuminating the winter skies.

The aurora australis.

This light brings no warmth to the male penguins,

who are still huddling,
defying the coldest conditions on the planet.

Their ordeal is drawing to a close.

Thirty days after it last set,
the sun rises once more on Antarctica.

Their appalling trials have all been for this.

Each father has just one meal left inside him.

He has been saving it all winter.

This single feed will sustain the chicks
for a few more days,

but the males have not eaten
for nearly four months.

If they do not eat soon,
they and their chicks will die.

But there is hope on the horizon.

The females are returning
and their bellies are full with fish.

As they approach, waves of excitement
ripple through the huddle.

Each female calls to her mate
and he, recognising her song, trumpets back.

Reunited at last.

The mother sees her chick for the first time.

She's keen to start parenting,

but the father needs persuading to surrender
the chick he has been caring for all winter.

He must now put his chick at risk.

In these temperatures it could freeze in seconds.

The male will have to let go.

Eventually, the transfer to the mother
is safely made.

The chicks grow quickly
on a diet of fish and squid.

Soon they are keen to explore,
but always with mother in tow.

This chick is less fortunate,
its mother has not returned to claim it.

Another orphan is searching for a new family,

but this female already has a chick of her own.

Some orphans receive too much mothering

from penguins whose own chicks
have not survived.

The urge to parent is so strong
that they will compete with one another

to adopt any chick they find.

Many of these squabbles end in tragedy
as the poor chick is trampled to death.

Those chicks that do have parents
quickly learn survival skills.

Even in spring,
they must huddle together for warmth,

just as their fathers did in the depths of winter.

A group of chicks has got lost in the blizzard.

Cold and disorientated, they search for the colony.

It will not be long
before the storm claims its first victims.

By early summer,
the chicks are surprisingly well-developed

and now look ready to take on the world.

Those that survive their first year
have the best possible start in life

thanks to the extraordinary hardships
endured by their parents.

Parents who battled
with the Antarctic winter and won.

In the Arctic, the two polar bear cubs
are now independent of their mother

and they briefly reunite
where their home ranges overlap.

Their time together will be fleeting.

Most of their lives are now spent alone,
wandering the vast tracts of frozen ocean.

Following their mother has prepared them
for life at the pole,

an ever-changing land ruled by ice.

Whether they are ready for the bigger changes

that have begun to shape the ice worlds
of our planet remains to be seen. Vast open plains.

Immense spaces.

Eerie silence.

But any feeling of emptiness is an illusion.

The plains of our planet support
the greatest gatherings of wildlife on Earth.

At the heart of all that happens here
is a single living thing.

Grass.

This miraculous plant covers
a quarter of all the lands of the Earth.

Grasslands exist wherever there is a little rain,
but not enough to sustain a forest.

Some are huge.

The Central Asian Steppe alone
extends one third of the way around our planet.

It's summer,
and eagles effortlessly cruise the thermals,

scanning the ground beneath for signs of prey.

In the distant reaches of outer Mongolia,

one of the planet's great migrations is underway.

Few people ever see
this extraordinary annual event.

Mongolian gazelle.

Two million are thought to live here,
but no one really knows.

For much of the time,
they're scattered through this vast landscape,

but once a year they come together
to have their young.

Nearly all will give birth within the next 10 days.

0ut in the open,
communal calving is the safest way to have young.

With so many pairs of eyes keeping watch,

it's almost impossible for predators to sneak up.

There are no bushes, no trees.
There's only one thing to hide behind.

Grass.

And it's not very effective.

Predators also have a hard time
raising their young on open grassland.

Without trees,
eagles have to nest directly on the ground.

All the inhabitants of the Great Plains
are exposed to the elements.

Fire sparks panic in the herd.

Gazelles are born to run

and even young calves easily outpace the flames,

if they can avoid being trampled.

With nothing to stand in its way,

the blaze consumes anything that can't flee.

Huge quantities of grass, valuable food,
have been lost.

And with it, the old and the weak.

The gazelles move on to new pastures
and leave the desolation behind them.

From the ashes rises the phoenix.

Grass, the incredible survivor.

Because it grows from a protected part
at the base of its stems,

grass is almost indestructible.

Able to repair and reproduce itself rapidly,

it covers more of the Earth's land
than any other plant

and feeds more wildlife than any other.

Red-billed quelea.

0ne and a half billion
swarm across the savannahs of Africa.

These are the most numerous birds on Earth.

Some flocks are so vast

that they can take five hours to pass overhead.

0nly grass can feed plagues of these proportions.

The ravenous hordes devour the seeds.

And the leaves and stems are cropped
by great herds of antelope.

The East African savannahs alone
sustain nearly two million wildebeest.

They trim the grass down to its roots,
leaving little in their wake,

but within days the plant will recover

and continue to sustain
the biggest herds on Earth.

Grass is not confined to the tropics.

It manages to grow
even in the bitter conditions of the Arctic.

Beyond the limits of the last tree,
the planet is barren and ice-locked.

A frozen no-man's land at the end of the Earth.

But for a short time each year,
the long, dark winter releases its grip.

Temperatures rise

and grass that has lain dormant and frozen
throughout the winter sprouts once more.

Green returns to the Arctic.

The receding ice reveals
an immense flat plain the size of Australia.

This is the Arctic tundra.

It's a desolate, silent wilderness.

But it's about to change.

Snow geese.

They winter along the Gulf of Mexico,

and in spring they fly
the entire length of North America

to reach the Arctic tundra.

Five million birds make this journey every year.

Their marathon migration
is almost 3,000 miles long

and has taken them three months.

Exhausted and starving,
they touch down inside the Arctic Circle,

back at their traditional breeding grounds at last.

Snow geese pair for life.

As soon as couples arrive,
they must stake a claim to a nesting patch.

Ideal sites are in short supply
and quarrelsome neighbours are all around.

Disputes can be vicious.

Point taken!

It's a long way to travel, but for a short period,
the tundra is the ideal place for a grazer.

The grass grows vigorously
during the short, intense summer

and there are fewer predators than further south.

Here, geese can nest on the ground
in relative safety.

Nonetheless, this female must incubate
her eggs for three weeks

and throughout this time
she will be very vulnerable.

An Arctic fox surveys the colony.

She's been waiting for the geese all winter.

Sneaking up unnoticed is impossible.

Perhaps fortune will favour the bold.

The colony is well-defended.
There are no easy pickings here.

She's driven away from every nest,
but hunger compels her to continue.

There are more eggs here
than she can possibly eat now.

But the nesting season is short.

So she stashes much of her plunder
for later in the year

when all the geese have gone.

Further south,
other bigger predators prowl the tundra.

Wolves.

For them, finding food on the plains
is an even greater challenge.

Not only is their prey seasonal,
it's also hard to find.

They've been searching for days without a sign.

Somewhere in this immense landscape
there is food for them.

This is it. Caribou.

Travelling 30 miles a day,

they can cover nearly 2,000 miles
during the summer months.

The wolves will starve
if they don't find the caribou.

But it's no easy task to locate prey
that never stops travelling.

Biting flies and the quest for new pasture
drives the migration ever onwards.

A wolf has finally picked up the trail.

The caribou are close.

At last, a chance.

The hunt is on.

The wolf panics the herd,
and the weak and young are singled out.

A calf is separated from its mother.

At the goose colony,
it's high summer and eggs are hatching.

The young all emerge within a day or two,
a marvel of timing.

The colony is now home to a million goslings.

The fox is still gathering all she can get.

Sometimes one mouth simply isn't enough.

0ne will have to do.

Not all food is stored. Some is needed right now.

She has seven hungry cubs to feed.

As their appetites grow, the mother
must work tirelessly to raise her family.

0nly fat, healthy cubs
will survive the Arctic winter.

The vast majority of the goslings
are still flourishing.

Their parents lead them
down to the safety of the water

as soon as they're strong enough
to make the journey.

For the foxes, boom time has come to an end.

But the mother has given her cubs
the best possible start in life.

The geese will continue grazing the tundra

until the summer ends
and they're forced to head south for the winter.

At these latitudes, the sun's rays are weak

and grass can only grow here
for a few months a year.

But further south,
summers are longer and the grasslands flourish.

The prairies of North America.

This rich pasture once supported
the greatest herds ever seen on our planet.

There were once 60 million bison,

but no animal is immune
to intensive hunting by man

or the destruction of its habitat.

And a century ago,
the bison were reduced to barely 1,000.

Now, thanks to rigorous protection,
the species is recovering.

The growing season is long,

and the grass here
can support herds all year round.

Male bison weigh in at one ton.

In high summer,
the bulls are fat from the rich grazing

and in prime condition, but only a few will mate.

Exactly which few is about to be decided.

0n temperate plains around the world,
summer is a time for growth and reproduction.

Now the grass produces its flowers.

New colours also come to the plains.

The northern flowering is mirrored
by the grasslands of the southern hemisphere,

and nowhere is more impressive
than on the veldt of South Africa.

Not all temperate plains
are so rich and colourful in the summer.

This is midsummer on the Tibetan plateau,

the highest great plain in the world.

Despite the conditions, grass survives

and in sufficient quantities
to support the highest of all grazing herds,

those of the wild yak.

Even in summer, life is hard.

Temperatures rarely rise above freezing
and the air is thin.

It's also exceptionally dry for one very big reason,

the Himalayas.

The great mountain range acts as a barrier,
preventing clouds moving in from the south,

and this casts a giant rain shadow
that leaves Tibet high and dry.

Grass clings to life

even as desiccating winds remove
what little moisture remains in the soil.

So long as grass can survive, so can grazers.

Wild ass.

The males are fighting to win territories.

Those that hold the best
are more likely to attract a herd of females.

It's a frisky business.

That counts as a victory,

but he can't assume
the females will actually turn up.

Female asses are mysterious creatures.

They come and go as they please

and much of their behaviour
seems unfathomable to an outsider.

They're the great nomads of the plateau

and will often trek vast distances
across these parched plains

in search of oases.

But when they do find paradise,

they are liable to feed and drink
for just a few hours

and then head back to the dust
for no apparent reason.

Wild ass are the most conspicuous pioneers
of this high frontier,

but the most numerous grazer in Tibet
lives underground.

Pika, a relative of the rabbit.
It, too, feeds on grass.

0n the exposed plateau,
pikas never stray far from their burrows.

But even so, squatters will move in
given half a chance.

While ground peckers and snow finches
can be a nuisance,

they're worth tolerating because they provide
a valuable early warning system.

The bizarre Tibetan fox. The pika's nemesis.

When stalking, it keeps below the skyline,

perhaps helped by its curious body shape.

But why the square head?

In summer, the Tibetan plateau heats up,

drawing in warm, wet air from the south.

But the water never arrives.

As the moist air approaches,
it's forced upwards by the Himalayas

and condenses into huge rain clouds.

These clouds drop all their water
on the southern side of the mountains.

The very peaks that keep Tibet dry

are responsible for the monsoon rains
falling farther south

and the greening of India.

Here, soaked by rain and bathed in tropical sun,

grass reaches its full potential.

Elephant grass is the tallest in the world.

Grass that towers over an elephant
can conceal all sorts of surprises.

The male Lesser Florican.

It's hard work getting noticed
when you go courting in high grass.

The long-grass plains of tropical India

are home to some of the largest
grass-eating mammals on our planet.

And some of the smallest.

Pygmy hogs are no bigger than rabbits.

They're the tiniest and rarest of all wild pigs.

The female is busy collecting grass,
but not for eating.

She's building a nest.

Each piglet may be small enough
to fit in the palm of a hand,

but she does have 10.

This is how grass can grow,
given unlimited sunshine and water.

But on most tropical plains across our planet,

the wet season is followed by a dry one.

0n the African savannahs,

grazers are marching in search of grass and water.

Without rain, these plains can become dust bowls.

Grass can now lose its hold.

Elephants are in immediate danger.

They must drink almost daily.

Driven on by thirst,

they march hundreds of miles
across the parched plains.

Relying on memory,
the matriarchs lead their families

to those special water holes
that saved them in previous years.

This one still has water,
but they must share what remains

with desperately thirsty animals of all kinds.

These are tense times.

The elephants dominate the water hole,

but as night falls the balance of power will shift.

Thirsty herds continue to arrive
throughout the night.

It's a cooler time to travel.

In the darkness, the tables turn.

The elephant's night vision
is little better than our own.

But lions have much more sensitive eyes.

The cats are hungry
and the elephants seem to sense it.

Lions don't usually hunt elephants,

but desperate times require desperate measures.

This herd contains calves, easier targets.

But how to reach them?

The adults encircle their young.

It's an impenetrable wall of grey.

A few exhausted stragglers are still arriving.

0ne of them is alone.

But it's too big for the lions to tackle.

This one looks a little smaller.

A solitary lion stands no chance,

but the whole pride is here.

There are 30 of them
and they are specialist elephant hunters.

This elephant will feed the whole pride
for at least a week.

Elephants know
these drinking holes are dangerous,

but they have no choice.

The dramas that play out here
are a savage reminder

of how important water is
for all life on these plains.

As the dry season finally draws to a close,

Africa's baked savannahs
undergo a radical change.

Rain sweeps across the continent

and grass, the great survivor, rises again.

And the herds return.

For months they've been scattered
over huge areas,

clinging to existence around tiny water holes.

Now, the good times are back.

A few African savannahs are very special.

Here, rainwater from far and wide
flows across the flat plains.

Grass is submerged, but still it grows.

Flooded, burnt, baked and frozen,
grass can withstand it all.

After six months of drought,

grass replaces dust over great areas.

Fresh new shoots draw animals
from great distances.

Many undertake epic migrations
to catch the boom time.

Some resourceful animals live here
all the year round.

Baboons are permanent residents,
but they have to change their behaviour

if they are to gather what they need
on the newly flooded plains.

There's plenty to eat,

but getting to it can be a little uncomfortable.

New water poses problems for the youngsters,

but they know where to find a dry seat.

Ajuicy snail is ample recompense
for sodden paws.

Having survived the dry, barren times,

animals can now reap the rewards.

0n this seasonal planet,

the great plains are lands of feast and famine.

At their peak, they support the greatest
gatherings of wildlife found anywhere on Earth. The coast - the frontier
between land and sea.

This is the most dynamic
of all the ocean habitats.

The challenge here is
to survive change.

Extreme change.

Cape Douglas, on the most
westerly of the Galapagos islands,

totally unprotected from the massive
rollers of the Pacific Ocean

and one of the roughest
coastlines in the world.

The marine iguanas of the Galapagos
are the world's only sea-going lizards.

Seaweed is all they eat,
but doing so is a dangerous business.

The local crabs have
become specially flattened,

minimising the effect
of the pounding waves.

And the iguanas have huge
claws to grip the rocks.

This seaweed really is fast food.

There are only a few seconds
in which to grab a few mouthfuls

before the next breaker
comes pounding in.

Female iguanas feed
only on the exposed rocks,

but the males which are larger swim and
dive beneath the surface to reach the weed.

They go as deep as ten metres,

for there beyond the destructive reach
of the waves, they find the best fronds.

Being cold-blooded they
have to return to land

after about ten minutes or
so to warm up again in the sun.

Finding food is not the only
challenge for coastal residents.

These rocky shores are hardly
a safe place to lay their eggs

and each year the marine iguanas
have to journey inland

to find a more suitable one.

The females lay their eggs in burrows
and leave them there to hatch,

and to do that they
need nice soft sand.

Down at the water edge, it was easy
to escape danger in rocky crevices,

but up here the females
are dangerously exposed.

A Galapagos hawk.

The lizards don't give up
without a struggle.

These hawks stay on the coast all year
But they are exceptional.

The majority of the birds
that frequent this frontier

spend most of their time elsewhere.
In or above the open ocean.

However all seabirds have to come
to land in order to lay their eggs.

And after spending many lonely
months searching the ocean for food,

they have to re-establish
their social relationships.

Frigate birds display and
exchange nesting material.

Waved albatross dance.

The need to lay their egg on firm ground
ties the albatross to the coast

but parental responsibilities
are shared.

While one looks after the egg,
...the other can go off to feed.

The need to breed brings
many different animals

to the coast each year
for a few weeks.

Male sea turtles spend all
their lives at sea, but the females,

like birds, must come to
land to lay their eggs.

To do that green turtles that live
and feed off the coast of Brazil

swim fifteen hundred miles to the
tiny island of Ascension

that lies bang in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean.

Exactly how they manage to
navigate with such accuracy

and find this tiny lump of rock,
just seven miles wide is a mystery.

But each year up to five thousand
turtles manage to do so and then,

close to the coast of Ascension,
they mate.

Travelling to and from Ascension and
nesting here can take up to six months

and throughout that entire time,
none of them feed at all.

After mating a female has to
leave her natural element

and haul herself up onto land.

She does so at night,
laying about three or four times

at around fifteen day intervals.

After that she then swims all the way
back to the seas off Brazil.

She returns to this very same
island throughout her life.

Remarkably, all the world's sea turtles
return year after year

to just a few traditional
breeding sites.

Crab Island, in Australia,
is one of them.

This tiny two-mile long crescent of sand,

lying a few miles off
Queensland's northerly tip,

provides nesting sites
for half the entire population

of one of the world's
rarest sea turtles.

Flat-backed turtles are large,
over a metre long

but they have to be careful.

There are other giant
reptiles here too.

Salt-water crocodiles.

Every night throughout the year

there are flat-backs burying their eggs
all along this lonely stretch of sand.

Nine weeks later and things
are about to happen.

These eyes shining in the darkness
belong to night herons.

As if from nowhere, hundreds of birds
suddenly appear on the sand dunes.

Pelicans wait patiently.

Jabiru storks pace up and down.

Before long they see what
they've been waiting for.

Because these turtles lay
their eggs throughout the year,

the hatchlings emerge night after night
in a steady trickle of beak sized meals.

Pelican's broad beaks allow
them to dig out the hatchlings

before the herons can spear
them on the surface.

The surf may be hundreds of metres away

and at least a third of the tiny turtles
do not survive the journey.

And its not just the birds
that take them.

Crocodiles, sharks and hungry fish
are all waiting in the shallows.

In fact only one in every hundred
hatchlings will survive to adulthood.

Another beach, another continent,
and a very special night.

Here in Costa Rica there is a turtle which
has found a way of reducing these dangers.

When Ridley's turtles arrive
to lay their eggs

they don't come in tens or hundreds...
but in thousands.

Over the next six days around four hundred
thousand females will visit this beach.

At the peak time, five thousand
are coming and going each hour.

The beach gets so crowded that
they have to clamber over one another

to find a bare patch of sand
where they can dig a nest hole.

Forty million eggs are laid
in these few days.

So these turtles ensure
that six weeks later

when their hatchlings emerge
it's not just a trickle.

It's a flood.

On some nights, over two million
hatchlings race down to the sea together.

With so many appearing simultaneously,

the predators are overwhelmed and most
of the young turtles reach the sea safely.

Leaving the sea and emerging onto
land is hard enough for turtles.

It'd even harder for fish.

Each year for hundreds of miles
along the Newfoundland coast,

capelin throw themselves
onto the beaches.

At least a million tonnes of
fish floundering out of the water

a real gift for scavenging
eagles and gulls.

Odd though it may seem for a fish,
these capelin,

like the turtles, have also
come out of the sea to breed.

The males are trying to
fertilise the eggs

that the females are
depositing in the sand.

Like the Ridley's turtles,

they have synchronised their mass
laying with the tide.

In a few days it will be over.

Most of the capelin die but only after
they've left their eggs in the sand.

Other capelin populations
lay their eggs

in the ocean so why do the
Newfoundland fish spawn on land.

It seems that eggs deposited in
the beach may be safer

from predators and develop faster
than in colder waters out to sea.

But wherever they do so,
the huge spawning shoals

provide the concentration of food that
seabirds need when they assemble to breed.

Ninety five percent of the
world's seabirds nest together,

mostly in large spectacular colonies.

This is Funk Island forty miles
off the coast of Newfoundland

an isolated rock crammed
with breeding sea-birds.

This was the last breeding ground for the
flightless Great Auk, sadly now extinct.

Today it's still the world's
largest Guillemot colony.

Over a million of them share the
crowded island with 250,000 gannets.

It's not the lack of suitable sites

that causes the seabirds
to breed in such densities.

Here in the North Atlantic,
there's a wide choice of

empty coastline that
the birds could use.

The key factor limiting the size
and location of seabird colonies

seems to be the availability of food
in the surrounding ocean.

There are lots of hungry mouths to feed
and a constant demand for fish.

Throughout the long summer days
at colonies like funk,

There's a continual stream of birds,
heading out to the ocean to find food

and returning with full crops
to feed their young.

Gannets will travel up
to two hundred miles

from the colony on
a single foraging trip.

They are not fussy eaters
and will take everything

from tiny sand eels to herring.

Puffins, on the other hand,
are very particular about

what they eat and because they can
only fly short distances,

they only nest where there's a good
supply of suitable food close by.

One such place is the sea of Okhotsk
in far eastern Russia.

This is the island of Talan.

Throughout the long arctic winter,
it is encircled by ice.

But as spring approaches,
that begins to break up

and seabirds that have spent
the winter feeding out

on the open ocean far to
the south begin to return.

Its isolated position and steep cliffs
make Talan a perfect nesting site.

The Tufted Puffins arrive first.

These are the Pacific cousins of
our less spectacular Atlantic species.

Horned puffins soon follow.

In all, fourteen different species
return to Talan each spring

and in just a few weeks
the once silent cliffs

come alive to the calls of
4 million breeding seabirds.

This is a multi-storey avian city.

Assembling in these dense colonies after
having spent a largely solitary life

at sea provides the birds with
the social stimulation

that is the key to co-ordinating
their breeding.

By nesting and laying together
they ensure that

most of their chicks will leave
the nest at exactly the same time.

Just like the turtles this is the way
they spread the impact of predators.

The world's largest eagle.
Steller's sea eagle.

A third as big again as a golden.

Throughout the summer, the eagles
hunt in Talan's crowded colonies.

Riding on the updrafts,
they patrol the top of the cliffs,

looking out for any Kittiwake
that ventures too far from the rock face.

Suddenly the huge eagle stoops
with the aerial agility of a falcon.

Co-ordinated panic among the kittiwakes
confuses their attacker.

But the eagle doesn't give up.

And it has got one.

Another kind of seabird on Talan
has a particularly effective way

of defending itself against predators

but it doesn't appear until
an hour before sunset.

As if from nowhere, dense swarms of
seabirds suddenly arrive off-shore.

They're spent the day feeding far away,
where the sea ice has already broken up.

They are crested auklets,
hardly bigger than starlings.

A million of them return to Talan each
year to nest in its fields of boulders.

For an hour before sunset,
the hillsides comes alive

with huge flocks of circling auklets
They're nervous.

No one wants to be the first to land.

Auklets are very social when
they are back together at the coast.

One of the advantages of nesting
in such densities

may be the chance to share
information on good feeding sites.

It also gives them the
opportunity to court.

But perhaps most importantly,
there is safety in numbers.

Ravens and peregrines circle above
the scree slope every evening.

By taking off together,
the auklets hope to confuse the predators.

Eventually their persistence
pays off.

The birds that face the
greatest challenge in coming

to the coast to nest are
surely the penguins.

Unable to fly, they have no alternative
but to brave the immense waves.

Most penguins live in the southern ocean

and they have to accept being
hurled about by the surf.

Whatever the weather, the penguin parents
have to come back to feed their chicks.

A southern sea lion bull

he knows the penguins always use
the same traditional landing beach.

Having braved the thundering surf,

the penguins have to make a mad dash
across open rock to get to their nests.

Despite his massive size and
a body adapted for swimming,

the bull chases the penguins for forty
or fifty metres across the rocks.

Having caught his penguin, the sea lion
carries it out into deeper water where,

by violently thrashing the little body,
he skins his meal.

The seas around the Falklands are some
of the roughest in the world.

In spite of that, the southern ocean
is home to millions of tiny seabirds

hardly bigger than swallows-petrels.

Being so small they are very
vulnerable to the bad weather.

A severe storm can blow
them miles off course

and keep them away from
their nests for days.

But these birds have developed a very
effective solution to that problem.

They lay a rather special egg.

Most bird's eggs, left exposed for even
a few hours, will chill and never hatch.

But these eggs are different.

They can be left for several days
without incubation and remain undamaged...

...while the parents struggle
home through the storm.

Prions have also come up with
a good way to avoid most predators.

They never come back to the
coast until after dark.

These are Thin-billed Prions.

Their burrows honeycomb this
hillside in the Falklands.

It'd deserted throughout
the daylight hours...

...but as soon as it's dark

and difficult for airborne
predators to hunt...

...the prions return.

As soon as they land, they call.

The problem, of course...

...is finding your burrow
among all the others.

He's listening out for
his mate's call...

...and down he goes.

The Alaskan coast.

It's spring and the last of
the winter storms is subsiding.

The plankton in this sea is in
bloom again and just off shore,

humpback whales have
returned to feed.

For these huge animals, there is a real
risk in coming into such shallow water

and each year a good number
of them pay the price.

It is an ignominious ending
for an ageing whale.

But so much flesh will not go to waste.

A black bear emerges
cautiously from the woods.

Visitors to the coast that don't come to
breed, have usually come to scavenge.

A whole range of different animals
have learnt to exploit

the enormous quantity of food...

...that washes up everyday on
coastlines around the world.

But like so much at the coast
the quantity of flotsam

and jetsam is unpredictable.

Nobody can rely on it alone.

This carcass even attracted
a shy pack of wolves only too happy

to anoint themselves with the...

...scent of rotting whale.

It was months before the
scavengers finally

cleaned up all the meat
on this huge and...

...unpredictable gift from the sea.

Whales give birth to their young at sea
and so can spend their entire lives there.

Other marine mammals - one of that are
in fact distant cousins of bears

have to return... each year to
their ancestral home on land.

The high arctic
Here lives one of them... the walrus.

Walruses spend nearly
all their lives at sea,

but each year for just a few weeks...

...they have to return to the coast.

They seek out isolated beaches
like this one on Round Island in the...

...far northern Pacific.

Suitable sites like this,
free from bears, are so scarce...

...that at times as many as
fourteen thousand animals

will cram themselves on to this...

...one beach.

When they first emerge from
the sea the walrus are white.

That's because being warm-blooded
animals living in very cold ocean,

they conserve heat by...

...keeping their blood concentrated
in the core of their bodies.

On land it's warm enough for them
to allow their...

...outer blood vessels to dilate and
that turns their skin from white to pink.

Now they can moult the outer
layers of their skin,

rubbing themselves up
against the rocks.

But more than anything
else coming to land

brings the walrus relief
from having to spend energy

maintaining their body temperature
in an icy-cold ocean.

Heat conservation, in fact, may well
be the primary reason so many...

...sea mammals are forced to
return to the land each year.

The world's coldest seas
are in Antarctica.

Each spring, half the world's
Southern Elephant seals

return to the island
of South Georgia.

Elephant seals have particularly thick
insulation of blubber that keeps them warm.

For them breeding is the only
reason to leave the sea.

With temperatures down
to minus 20...

...and hundred mile an hour winds,
it can't be comfortable out on the beach,

but heat dissipates more
rapidly through water...

...than through air so even
in these conditions...

...their young which at first
don't have a thick coat

of blubber will be far
warmer on the land.

Once the males are established on the
beach the females soon follow.

Within just ten days the empty beach
fills up with six thousand elephant seals.

Almost immediately the females give
birth to pups sired the previous year.

Their milk is very rich and the pups
grow astonishingly quickly.

In just three weeks they turn form thin
bags of skin to fat balls of blubber.

As soon as they've given birth,

the females become sexually
receptive again...

...and it's now that the
advantages of breeding

in such dense colonies become clear.

Females can make their
choice from many males,

while successful males can
have access to lots of females.

But to gain that access and
control a harem of females,

the bull must be prepared to fight.

The larger the male, the louder the roar
and the more likely he is to win.

When males are well matched these bloody
battles will last twenty minutes or more.

Eventually, the loser retreats into
a stream already pink with his own blood.

These battles certainly help females
select the strongest bulls...

...but they bring great
dangers for the pups.

Each year, in the denser
parts of the colony,

a fifth of the pups are
crushed to death.

This is why it may
be better to mate

at the edge of the beach
close to the sea.

Less dominant males hide
in the surf.

They are waiting to try
and steal an illicit mating...

...with females as
they come and go.

This male knows he has been
spotted by the big bull

who claims all the females
on this part of the beach.

Breeding in groups can bring advantages
to pups as well as to adults.

Along the coast of Patagonia southern sea
lions breed together each year

in groups several hundred strong.

For the growing pups these colonies
act rather like a school.

The bonds and relationships
developed here on the beach

may be vital for the
rest of their lives.

Sea lions are very social animals
and as adults and young forage together,

they probably share...

...information about the location
of good feeding sites.

Conditions here could hardly be better
for the growing youngsters.

As the tide goes out it leaves behind
a selection of sheltered pools.

Perfect places for
learning to swim.

At high tide...

...it is easy for the pups to take their
first experimental dips in the surf.

A killer whale.

These young pups have never seen
anything like it before.

The Whales though are
very experienced.

Each year this same group turns
up along the coast

at precisely the same time
as the pups are starting to swim.

The whales need to surprise the pups,

so they have stopped calling
to one another and keep silent.

Speed is everything.

The whales do not take pups
that are out of the water,

but sometimes their momentum
drives them right up the beach

and then there's real danger
of getting stuck.

The whale has to thrash in this
frenzied way to get off the beach.

Most of the pups are taken into deep
water while they're still alive.

And there the whales - apparently.
Play with them.

Often an adult whale is joined
in the game by a youngster.

It may be learning how to grab a seal pup
before it risks a drive up the beach.

Whatever the reason the seal pup.
Still alive

is tossed back and forth
for over half an hour.

Even when the pup is dead, the whales'
sport is not completely over.

We can only speculate at the real reasons
behind this extraordinary behaviour.

But for the whales, the hunting
season is a short one.

Before long the pups learn to
stay well clear of the water

and the whales become less
and less successful.

After just two weeks, they move on.

The killing season is over.

That's how it often happens
along the coast.

Things are always changing.

They're never the same
for long in this,

the most dynamic of all
the ocean's habitats. Away from all land

the ocean.

It covers more than half the surface
of our planet

and yet for the most part
it is beyond our reach.

Much of it is virtually empty

a watery desert.

All life that is here
is locked in a constant search to find food

a struggle to conserve precious energy

in the open ocean.

The biggest of all fish

thirty tons in weight,
twelve meters long

a whale shark.

It's huge bulk is sustained by
mere microscopic creatures of the sea

Plankton.

Whale sharks cruise on regular habitual routes

between the best feeding grounds.

In February,
that takes them to the surface waters

far from the coast of Venezuela.

Others are already here.

Baitfish have come for the same reason
to feed on the plankton.

The whale shark has timed it's arrival
exactly right.

Oddly, the tiny fish swarm around it.

They're using it as a shield.

Other predatory fish are lurking nearby.

Yellowfin tuna.
They seem wary of the giant.

The shark dives,
as if to escape from such overcrowding.

Now the tuna have a chance
to attack the unprotected baitfish

but then

back comes the giant.

It has taken a vast mouthful
of the baitfish itself.

Plankton, it seems,
is not the only food for a whale shark.

Both shark and tuna feast together

but the tuna must be wary.

Even they can end up
in the whale shark's stomach.

Predators here must grab
what they can, when they can

for such events do not last long.

The dense shoals, on which so many depend

gather only when water conditions are perfect.

Many predators spend much of their time
cruising the open ocean

endlessly searching.

Plankton feeding rays do so,
gliding with minimum effort.

The oceanic whitetip shark

another energy efficient traveler.

It specializes in locating prey
in the emptiest areas of the open ocean

patrolling the top one hundred meters of water.

Taste in water,
is the equivalent of smell in the air.

An oceanic whitetip is able to detect
even the faintest trace.

Small pilot fish swim with it.

The shark can find prey
far more easily than they can

and they'll be able to collect the scraps
from it's meals.

It's long, fixed pectoral fins

enable it to soar through the water,
with the least expenditure of energy.

This shark has found a school
of rainbow runners.

It would eat one, given the chance

but rainbow runners are swift and agile
and not easily caught

so, it bides it's time.

There's a chance that, eventually,
it may spot a weakened fish that's catchable.

The hunter

endlessly waiting.

Excitement far from land.

A school of dolphin
five hundred strong.

They've sensed there's food around,
and they're racing to catch up with it.

The news has spread.
Now a number of schools are on their way.

They're heading towards the Azores

volcanic islands
a thousand miles west of Portugal.

The dolphin scan the water ahead
with their sonar.

They're close to their target.

This is it.

Scad mackerel.

It's difficult for a single dolphin
to catch the fish.

To avoid wasting energy
the work as a group.

They drive the fish upwards,
trapping them against the surface

and there,
other predators await them.

Cory's shearwaters.

They're waiting for the dolphin
to drive the prey closer to the surface.

Now the shearwaters can dive down on them,
descending to twenty meters or more

and the dolphins block the baitball's retreat.

The dolphins leave
as soon as they've had their fill

and, at last, the mackerel sink below
the diving range of the birds.

As the Sun disappears,
a profound change takes place in the ocean.

Deep water plankton
start to rise from the depths

and another hungry army
prepares to receive it.

Every night,
wherever conditions are right,

countless millions of creatures from the deep
migrate to the surface, seeking food.

A baby sailfish,
fifteen centimeters long

snaps up everything in it's path.

In three years' time, it'll be one of the oceans
most formidable hunters

weighing sixty kilos.

Just now, however,
it's very vulnerable.

These manta rays are giants.

Eight meters across
and weighing over two tons.

The blade-like projections on either side of the head
help to steer plankton into the manta's mouth.

Dawn returns, and the plankton
sinks back into the depths.

If we are to follow,
we must use a submarine.

As we descend into the darkness,
the pressure builds, the temperature falls.

Below five hundred meters,
new, mysterious animals appear.

Their bizarre shapes help them
to remain suspended in the dark space.

Some resemble creatures
familiar from shallower waters

others defy classification.

All around, organic particles
drift downwards.

Marine snow, detritus from the creatures
swarming in the sunlit waters above.

The snow is food for many animals here,
like the sea spider

a small relative of shrimps and crabs.

Those strange leg-like appendages
are feathered, to stop it from sinking.

They can also enmesh marine snow

which it wipes carefully
into it's jaws.

A sawtooth eel
hangs upright and motionless.

Gazing ever upwards, it watches
for prey, silhouetted against the faint

glimmerings of light from the surface.

Days may pass before prey swims
close enough for it to strike.

Farther down still,
the blackness is complete.

No vestige of sunlight
can penetrate as far as this.

Food is very scarce and nothing
can afford to waste any energy.

A dumbo octopus simply flaps a fin

no need for the jet propulsion
used by it's shallow water relatives above.

The weirdest, in this world of the strange,
vampyroteuthis

the vampire squid from hell.

Disturb it and it only retreats
a little distance.

Go after it,
and it has a special defense.

To see what it does,
you must switch off the lights.

The vampire squid
has lights of it's own.

Bioluminescent bacteria
shine from pockets on it's arms
to confuse it's predators.

Are those eyes?

In fact they're spots
at the end of it's mantle.

A bite there,
would leave the head unscathed.

The threat diminishes, and vampyroteuthis
disappears into the blackness.

At last,
the sea floor.

Over two miles down, the pressure here
is three hundred times that at the surface.

It takes several months for marine snow
to drift down as far as this.

As you travel away
from the rocky margins of the continents

an immense plain stretches ahead.

It extends for thousands of miles

gradually sinking downwards.

There are faint trails in the ooze,
signs that even here there is life.

These are what made some of them

sea urchins sifting the accumulating drifts.

Shrimps standing on elegant tiptoe

fastidiously select the particles
that appeal to them

but, in the deep sea, as everywhere else
if there are grazers, there are hunters.

A monkfish, almost indistinguishable
from the sand on which it lies.

Why waste energy chasing around,
if you can attract prey towards you with a lure?

Maybe that one was a bit big.

The monkfish can wait, for days if necessary,
until the right sized meal turns up.

Scavengers on the other hand,
have to move around to find their food.

Crabs can detect
the faintest of tastes in the water

and that helps them locate the latest body
to drift down from above.

Eels are already feeding on the corpse.

Isopods, like giant marine woodlice
a third of a meter long

are ripping into the rotting flesh.

Over the next few hours
there'll be frenzied competition

between scavengers of all kinds
to grab a share.

Just occasionally,
there is a gigantic bonanza.

The remains of a sperm whale.

It died five months or so ago.

There's little left but fatty blubber
clinging to it's bones.

It's flesh has nourished life
for miles around

but now the feast is almost over.

Spider crabs, a meter across,
still pick at the last putrid remains.

A few weeks more, and nothing
will be left, but bare bones.

The crabs will have to fast,
until the next carcass drifts down.

But not all food
comes from the sunlit world above.

The floor of the Atlantic Ocean is split in two
by an immense volcanic mountain chain

that winds unbroken
for forty five thousand miles around the globe.

In places, it's riven by great fissures,
from which superheated water

loaded with dissolved minerals
blasts into the icy depths.

Clouds of sulfides solidify into
towering chimneys, as tall as a three story house.

At four hundred degrees
this scalding cocktail of chemicals

would be lethally toxic
to most forms of life

but astoundingly, a particular kind
of bacteria thrives here

and feeding on the bacteria,
vast numbers of shrimps.

So, beyond the farthest reach
of the Sun's power

a rich independent community exists,
that draws all it's energy

directly from the Earth's molten core.

On the other side of the planet,
in the western Pacific bordering Japan

the dragon chimneys, another series
of hot vents, erupting in the darkness.

Here, more, but different bacteria
thrive in a similar way.

And here, too, more crustaceans,
but quite different species

from those around the hot vents
in the Atlantic.

These are squat lobsters,
clad in furry armor

jostling with one another
beside the jets of superheated water

for the best places,
from which to graze on bacteria.

These vents, too, like those in the Atlantic
are isolated oases

so widely separated,
that each community is unique.

Cross to the other side of the Pacific,
to the deep near the Galapagos Islands

and there are yet other fissures venting
superheated water.

One and a half miles down,
at a site known as Nine North

towering chimneys support
a spectacular display of giant tubeworms.

These vents
give off so much energy

that some of the worms reach
three meters in length.

They're the fastest growing
marine invertebrates known.

All told, over fifty different species
have so far been found living here.

The inhabitants of these bustling communities
may grow at speed

but their existence can also be short,
for the vents do not erupt indefinitely.

Suddenly, unpredictably,
they may become inactive.

Nine months have passed at Nine North.

What were only recently chimneys
teeming with life

have turned into cold,
sterile mineral monuments.

Some eddy, deep in the Earth's crust

diverted the volcanic energy elsewhere

and, an entire microworld was extinguished.

In places, volcanoes have erupted to build
great submarine mountains.

There are thought to be around
thirty thousand such volcanoes

some, measured from the sea floor,
are taller than Everest.

Sheer cliffs
soaring to drowned volcanic peaks.

Powerful currents
sweep up the mountains' flanks

transporting nutrients from deep water
towards the summits.

The hard rock provides excellent anchorage

for communities of great variety
and stunning color.

Soft corals, several meters across
collect the marine snow as it drifts past.

Whip corals stretch out into the current.

Giant sponges filter nourishment
from the cold water.

A richly varied community flourishes here

sustained by the nutrients and detritus
in the icy currents that flow around the peak.

Yet it is all blossoming
on an extinct volcano

a mile below the reach of the Sun.

A nautilus. It spends it's days
hiding four hundred meters down

But as night falls, it ascends
up to the reefs, to look for food.

It's graceful shell contains gas filled
floatation chambers, that control it's depth.

It's powered by a jet of water,
squirting from a siphon

but it travels shell first,
so it can't see exactly where it's going.

It's nearest living relatives
are squid and octopus

which, over evolutionary time,
have both lost their shells

and the octopus has become
one of the nautilus' major predators.

It's a master of disguise.

The nautilus keeps well clear of them.

It's small tentacles carry
highly developed chemical sensors

which can detect traces
of both predators and prey.

It uses it's water jet
to dig in the sand.

Because it devotes so little energy to swimming,
it only needs a meal once a month.

Got something. And just as well.
Dawn is approaching and it has to puff it's way

back, to deeper waters.

Thirty miles away, shoals of squid
are jetting upwards towards the surface.

By night, they seek small fish
among the plankton, but they're cautious.

Pacific spotted dolphin.

They're guided by their sonar.

The dolphin, as so often, are working
as a team, synchronizing their attacks

to confuse their prey.

As dawn approaches, squid and fish and plankton
retreat downwards, to shelter in the darkness.

Some of these isolated volcanoes

rise as much as nine thousand meters
from the sea floor, reaching close to the surface.

Around these peaks
invigorated by daily sunshine

marine life flourishes
in spectacular abundance.

Fish crowd here, because the volcano
forces nutrients to the surface

encouraging the plankton to bloom.

An oceanic wanderer,
a mola mola

stops by to be cleaned by reef fish,
at the sea mount edge.

Butterfly-fish pluck string-like parasites
from it's flanks.

The huge fish lives on jellyfish
over a thousand meters down

where the water is twenty degrees colder

so, a brushup near the surface,
allows it to warm up

before making more deep water forays.

The summit of this volcanic mountain
rises above the surface of the sea.

It's Ascension Island

eight hundred miles from any other land,
a welcome vital haven for long distance travelers.

Frigatebirds spend months
continuously airborne at sea

but at nesting time, they come to Ascension
from all over the ocean.

The island's barren slopes
of volcanic ash and lava

might seem to offer
perfectly good sites for a nest

but the frigates choose
an even more isolated site

Boatswain Bird Island,
a lonely pillar, just of Ascension's coast.

Frigates are the world's lightest bird,
relative to their wingspan

and they can soar for weeks on end
with minimal effort.

They seem much more at home in the skies,
than in a crowded colony on land

but nest, they must.

They come from all over the Atlantic
to this, their only colony.

There are boobys here, too.

To raise their young,
seabirds worldwide seek such remote islands.

Swimmers also come to Ascension to breed.

A female green turtle
approaches the coast.

She's not eaten once, in two months.

She may have traveled one thousand miles
from her feeding grounds

the greatest journey of her kind.

Many others are here, too,
resting on the sandy sea floor

awaiting the darkness of night,
when it'll be safer to visit the beaches.

Eggs that were laid a few weeks ago,
at the start of the season

are beginning to hatch.

Most hatchings happen at night.

Now, in the light of day,
the young are extremely vulnerable.

They must get to the sea as soon as possible

but their trials have only just begun.

Many will drown
in the pounding waves.

During the next twenty years,
the vast majority will inevitably die

but those that survive will, eventually,
as their mothers did before them,

return to the very same beach
where they were hatched.

How they find their way back

across thousands of miles of open ocean,
we still have no idea.

A frigate soars.

Somewhere, beneath the surface below,

there is the food it must have.

But where?

Those that fly above the ocean

must be able to read the signs
of fresh supplies, or perish.

A hundred miles from the Mexican coast,
and keen eyes have spotted movement.

Sailfish, three meters long,
are closing in on prey.

They will only use
just enough energy to make their kill

never wasting a fin stroke.

Nearly a hundred sailfish have surrounded
a single school of baitfish.

It's very rare to see so many
of these hunters in one place.

To herd their prey,
the predators raise their huge dorsal fins.

A mistimed strike by one sailfish,
could fatally damage another

but each continually changes it's color,
from blue, to striped, to black

that warns it's companions of it's intentions
and also confuses the prey.

As the shoal is driven nearer the surface,
it comes within the range of the seabirds.

Out here, in the open ocean,
there is nowhere for the baitfish to hide.

Sailfish live a high octane life.

To survive, they must find prey daily

so their entire existence will be spent
on the move.

Over ninety percent on the living space
for life on our planet, is in the oceans

Home to the biggest animal that exists

or has ever existed.

the blue whale.

Some weigh nearly two hundred tons

twice the size of the largest dinosaur.

Despite their great size, we still have little idea
of where they travel in the vast oceans

and none at all
of where they go to breed.

The largest animal on Earth
feeds almost exclusively

on one of the smallest
krill, shrimp-like crustaceans.

They take many tons of water into their
ballooning throats in a single gulp

and sieve out what it contains.

Every day, each one swallows
some four million krill.

Such gargantuan harvests depend
on the continuing fertility of the oceans

But global changes now threaten
the great blooms of plankton

on which the whales depend.

Once and not so long ago

three hundred thousand blue whales
roamed the oceans

now, less than three percent
of that number remains.

Our planet is still full of wonders.

As we explore them, so we gain
not only understanding, but power.

It's not just the future of the whale
that today lies in our hands

it's the survival of the natural world
in all parts of the living planet.

We can now destroy,
or we can cherish.

The choice is ours. When you look
down on the Earth's surface,

it's impossible not to be impressed

by the sheer grandeur,
splendour and power

of the natural world.

It's been ten years
since we explored these wonders

in the first series of Manet Earth.

And since then, much has changed.

We can now show life on our planet

in entirely new ways,

bring you closer to animals
than ever before,

and reveal new wildlife dramas
for the very first time.

But that is not all.

The planet has changed, too.

Never have our wildernesses
been as fragile

and as precious as they are today.

At this crucial time
for the natural world,

we will journey to every corner
of the globe

to explore the greatest treasures
of our living planet,

and reveal the extreme lengths
animals go to to survive.

Finally, we will explore our cities

to see how life is adapting
to the newest habitat on Earth.

This is Planet Earth II.

There are hundreds
of thousands of islands,

each one a world in miniature.

A microcosm of our living planet.

The struggles to survive
on these remote lands

reflect the challenges
faced by all life on Earth.

The tiny island of Escudo
off the coast of Panama,

home to the pygmy three-teed sloth.

This is a male,
and life here suits him well.

Mangroves provide all the leaves
he can eat

and there are no predators to worry him.

Island life may seem idyllic,

but it comes at a price.

There are only a few hundred
pygmy sloths in existence,

and he needs a mate.

RILL CALL)

That's an enticing call...

...from a female

somewhere out there.

And this, for a sloth,
is a quick reaction.

The problem is there's deep water
between them.

So what should any red-blooded sloth do?

Swim, of course.

Could this be her?

He does his best to put on
a turn of speed.

But she's not the one.

She already has a baby

and she won't mate again
until it leaves her

in about six months' time.

Even life on a paradise island
can have its limitations.

But at least she can't be far away.

The world's entire population
of pygmy sloths

is isolated on a speck of land no bigger
than New York's Central Park.

The size of an island
has a huge influence

on the fate of those cast away there.

The island of Komodo in Indonesia.

Home to dragons.

Three metres long and weighing
a massive 70 kilos,

these are the largest living lizards
on the planet.

It's unusual to find large predators
on islands.

Yet, for four million years,
the Komodo dragon has dominated here.

It might seem there wouldn't be
enough food

to support such giants
on this relatively small island,

but reptiles, being cold-blooded,

need only about a tenth of the food
a carnivorous mammal would.

A single meal
will last a dragon a month.

They're so successful,
that their only serious competition

comes from others of their own kind,

and there are some 2,000 of them here.

This giant, however,
isn't looking for food.

He's looking for a mate.

Female dragons come into season
only once a year.

She is receptive.

So far, so good.

But he strayed
into someone else's patch.

Another huge male
thinks he is the king here.

Space being limited on islands,
dragon territories overlap,

and that creates continual conflict.

In dragon society, size is everything.

But if rivals are closely matched,
the outcome can be uncertain.

Muscular tails strike with
the power of sledgehammers.

And their serrated teeth
are as sharp as steak knives.

Each tries to topple his opponent.

Defeated.

Only the most powerful dragons
win the right to mate.

The limited food and space
on the small islands

can often lead to intense competition.

But some islands are immense.

More like miniature continents.

And these provide opportunities
for life to experiment and evolve.

Madagascar is one of
the biggest islands

and also one of the oldest,

having split away from Africa over
120 million years ago.

With time and isolation,
its animals have adapted

to take advantage
of every available niche.

The island now has some
250,000 different species,

most found nowhere else on Earth.

These are not monkeys, but lemurs.

From a single ancestor, about a hundred
different types have evolved.

The largest, the Indri,
seldom comes down from the branches.

The much smaller ring-tails
wander in troops across the forest floor

searching for fruit.

And tiny bamboo lemurs eat nothing
except bamboo.

With few competitors,

lemurs have been free to colonise almost
every environment on the island,

even the most extreme.

This baby sifaka
has a hard life ahead of it.

He's been born in the most arid
and hostile corner

of Madagascar's vast landscape.

If he is to survive here,
he has much to learn.

The spiny forest is like a desert.

It rarely rains, so water and food
is very hard to find.

Moving from tree to tree
is a perilous business.

Here, nearly all the plants
are covered with ferocious spines.

His mother searches the treetops
for the youngest leaves.

They provide the only food and water
to sustain the family.

At three months old,
the youngster is starting to explore.

All too soon, he will have to fend
for himself up here.

But it's altogether easier
to stay on Mother's back.

If he can master the strange ways
of this forest,

he will have a little corner
of Madagascar to himself.

Island life encourages animals
to do things differently,

and on some islands, that is essential.

There are islands still forming today

built by volcanoes.

Some erupt explosively,

others pour out rivers of molten rock,

lava.

In the last 50 years,

ten new volcanic islands
have been formed.

Newly created and often remote,
they're hard for colonists to reach.

Even those that do, find these
are tough places to survive.

This is Fernandina,

one of the Galapagos Islands
in the Pacific.

Young and still volcanically active,
it's a desolate place.

The surrounding sea, however,
is particularly rich with life,

and the frontier between these
two very different worlds

is the home of one of the strangest
of reptiles,

sea-going iguanas.

They are vegetarians,

but since there's little food for them
on the land,

marine iguanas graze on the sea floor.

A big male like this one
can dive to 30 metres

and hold his breath for half an hour.

There are more than 7,000 individuals
on Fernandina alone.

And by bringing nutrients from the sea
to the land,

the iguanas help other animals
to survive here, too.

Crabs feed on dead skin
on the iguanas' back

and, in turn, provide
a welcome exfoliation service.

While smaller lizards prey on
the flies that pester the colony.

But not all the relationships
on this island are so harmonious.

Marine iguanas lay their eggs in sand.

In June, when the hatchlings emerge,
they're vulnerable.

They must join the adults
at the edge of the sea.

But the journey will be a dangerous one.

Racer snakes.

The snakes missed their chance.

But more babies are hatching.

And now the snakes are on the alert.

This is the best feeding opportunity
they will get all year.

On flat ground a baby iguana
can outrun a racer snake.

But others are waiting in ambush.

Another hatchling has its first glimpse
of a dangerous world.

A snake's eyes aren't very good,
but they can detect movement.

So if the hatchling keeps its nerve,
it may just avoid detection.

A near miraculous escape.

The lucky survivors

can begin learning
the unique way of life

demanded by this hostile island.

Although marine iguanas
are expert swimmers,

they can't cross open oceans.

But even the stormiest waters

are no barrier for birds.

Gale force winds and cold temperatures

make the subantarctic islands
off New Zealand

particularly unwelcoming in winter.

But when the brief summer comes,
temperatures rise and winds slacken.

It's now that visitors arrive.

All here to breed before winter returns.

There's the Snares penguins.

Shearwaters come, too.

This is an excellent place for them
to dig their nesting burrows,

for no predators
have managed to get here.

Soon the island is crowded with birds.

Every one of them eager to make
the most of the short breeding season.

But not everyone has a partner.

A male Buller's albatross
waits for his mate.

Each year they spend six months apart,
travelling the ocean.

They reunite here to breed.

But this year, she's late.

No, that's not her.

The other birds come and go.

The clock is ticking.

If she doesn't appear soon, it will be
too late for them to breed successfully.

Every morning the shearwaters fly off
to collect food for their young.

Everybody else seems
to be getting on with it.

The shearwaters' return
marks another lost day.

There are three million birds
on the island,

but only one matters to him.

Could this be her?

At last.

At first, he's a little coy.

But not for long.

They greet each other
with the special dance

they've perfected over many years.

There is much to do, if they're to raise
a chick before winter returns.

But when you've been apart
for six months,

some things can't be rushed.

Islands in warm tropical waters
don't experience seasonal extremes.

The Seychelles, lying off
the coast of East Africa,

provide a sanctuary
for seabirds all the year round.

Fairy terns are permanent residents.

They take a fairly relaxed view
about what constitutes a nest.

A bare branch is quite enough.

Climbing onto it to incubate
has to be done with care.

Once a year, the noddies arrive.

They do make nests, and Pisonia trees

provide their young with a rather
less precarious start in life.

Nesting on this island looks idyllic,

but behind the beauty
there's a sinister side.

The Seychelles fody makes quick work
of an unattended egg.

She knows something's not quite right,

but her drive to incubate is strong.

The noddies, too, have a problem.

As their chicks grow,

so the Pisonia tree
develops seeds that are sticky

and equipped with hooks.

By the time the young noddies leave

they carry these hitchhiking seeds
away to other islands.

But sometimes the Pisonia trees
are too successful.

If a fledgling testing out its wings
drops to the ground,

it can get covered with the seeds.

Entangled and weighed down,

if it can't free itself,
the youngster will starve.

The Pisonia may have failed
to disperse these seeds,

but it will soon have fertiliser
for its roots.

This is why some people call
the Pisonia the "bird catcher tree".

The Fairy tern laid another egg,

and now she has a tiny chick to feed.

This chick is lucky.

By the time it fledges,
the Pisonia seeds will have dispersed

and the danger
they brought will be gone.

Even the most idyllic looking of islands

presents challenges
for the animals living there.

But the greatest threat they face
is change.

Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean.

For millions of years this remote
speck of land has been ruled by crabs.

Their ancestors came from the sea,

but most have now adopted
a land-based existence.

Given there are so many of them,
they get along relatively harmoniously.

They're the gardeners and caretakers
of a tiny crab utopia.

Once a year, they must all return
to the sea to breed,

and the march of the red crabs

is one of the greatest
natural spectacles on Earth.

There are 50 million of them.

It's an event that has brought
the island worldwide fame.

But in recent years,

millions of red crabs
haven't managed to reach the sea.

An invader has occupied this island.

Yellow crazy ants.

They escape from visiting ships,
and with no predators

to control them,
they have now created vast

super colonies in the forest.

When migrating
red crabs march into their territory,

the ants attack,

squirting acid
into the crabs' eyes and mouths.

The crabs have no defence.

Blinded and confused, they're doomed.

Humans brought these ant invaders here

and now humans are having
to control them.

Isolated communities may evolve
for millions of years in relative peace,

but when new challenges arrive,
they can struggle to cope.

Of all the species that have become
extinct in recent years,

around 80% have been islanders.

Our impact on the Earth is greater today
than ever before.

Yet some islands are so remote,

that few humans have even set foot
on them.

Zavodovski Island is one.

It lies in the great Southern Ocean.

It's not only surrounded
by the stormiest of seas,

it is itself an active volcano.

It's the last place on Earth
you'd choose to live.

Unless you're a chinstrap penguin.

There's plenty of food in these waters,
but to exploit it,

the penguins have to risk their lives.

Life here is dangerous in the extreme.

But there are some benefits from living
on a volcano.

Its warmth melts the snow
early in the year

and by January,
the Antarctic's mid-summer,

the island is covered in chicks.

Parents take turns at guarding them

until they're large enough
to be left alone.

This mother's chicks are hungry,
but she has no food left to give them.

Their survival depends on their father
returning with their next meal.

But some don't make it.

Skuas harass the colony
hoping to snatch a chick.

She can't risk leaving them.

Everything will be fine
as long as their father comes back soon.

He's been fishing
80 kilometres offshore,

but now, he's not far away.

For him, however,
and for all the other parents here,

the worst of the journey
is still to come.

Tiny claws help him to get
whatever grip he can on the rough lava.

For these commuters, it's rush hour.

Some have had a really bad day.

The father now has
a three-kilometre walk to the nest,

and a stomach loaded with food
doesn't help.

This is the largest penguin colony
in the world.

But as he makes the same journey
every other day,

he should be able to do it
with his eyes closed.

It's true that there can be safety
in numbers,

but numbers can also be something
of a problem

when you're trying to find
your own nest.

The mother is still waiting.

Her chicks are now desperate.

In the midst of all this
deafening chorus,

he can recognise her particular cry.

At last.

Both chicks will get a meal.

With a head bob of acknowledgement,
their mother now leaves.

It's her turn to do the feeding run.

This formidable commute is the price
these penguins pay for sanctuary.

A strange vision of paradise to us,
perhaps,

but for one and a half million penguins,

this island has it all.

Islands may seem remote
and insignificant,

but they are home to some of the most
precious wildlife on Earth.

Next time,

we ascend
into the planet's high mountains

to discover a spectacular
but hostile world

where life must be
at its most resourceful,

and only the toughest animals
can endure.
There are only
fourteen peaks in the world

that rise to over 8,000 metres.

All of them are here in the Himalayas.

Lethally cold,
scarred by gales and blizzards,

these mountains are among
the most hostile places on Earth.

Yet, a few special animals
manage to live here.

Snow leopards.

Like all creatures
of the high mountains,

they have had to adapt
both their body and their behaviour,

in order to survive.

Life at extreme altitude has shaped

some of the toughest animals
on the planet.

The sun-baked mountains
of the Arabian Peninsula.

They may only be a fraction
of the height of the Himalayas,

but they are still so dizzyingly steep

that in many places it's almost
impossible to get a foothold.

Yet, Nubian ibex
have made this their home.

The ibex choose the steepest cliffs
to raise their young

in safety,
beyond the reach of predators.

But living this sanctuary
comes with a cost.

These nursery slopes are so steep,

there is almost
no standing water up here.

So, to drink, an ibex family
must descend into the valley,

three hundred metres below.

The mothers pick out
the safest way down.

With soft cloven hooves that grip better
than any climbing shoe,

they are the most
accomplished mountaineers.

But the newborn kids
are still having to find their feet.

This is their first descent.

One mistake could make it their last.

Following the adults,
the kids finally reach the valley.

But once on level ground,
they're vulnerable.

Red foxes lie in wait.

At the first sign of danger,

the young ibex instinctively
run back to steeper ground.

But heading for
this particular rocky outcrop

could be a mistake.

It's a ten-metre drop.

The fox has them trapped,
or so it seems.

This is what ibex were born to do.

Scattering makes it hard
for the fox to pick a target.

And it certainly
can't follow them up here.

All it can do is wait
for one to slip and fall.

But these youngsters are fast learners

and they're now almost as sure-footed
as their parents.

The fox will have to find
its meal elsewhere.

It's just not been a good day.

Now, at last, the young ibex can drink.

But they'll soon need to return
to the safety of the sheer cliffs.

Mastering precipitous terrain
is always challenging,

but there are more fundamental problems
for life in the mountains.

The Alps, Europe's highest peaks.

It's winter,
and food is desperately short.

The golden eagle
has to spend every daylight hour

scanning the slopes for something,
somewhere, to eat.

Her two-metre wingspan
allows her to glide effortlessly

for over 100 kilometres in a single day.

Her extraordinary eyes
enable her to spot prey

from over three kilometres away.

But she is not the only one
who's looking for food.

When she spots a chance,
she must move fast.

She can dive at
over 300 kilometres an hour,

only a peregrine is faster.

During winter, even eagles rely
almost entirely on carrion.

It's a dead fox,
and it could sustain her for days.

Other scavengers must defer.

The hungry crows
soon regain their courage.

They'll try any trick to steal a morsel.

And they are annoyingly persistent.

But this mob
are the least of her worries.

A bigger eagle takes control.

But this kill
is too important to give up,

so she must fight.

For the moment,
she's won the carcass back.

But a kill like this will attract
every eagle for miles around.

As ever, the strongest
wins the lion's share.

Unable to defend the carcass any longer,

the first eagle
must now continue its search.

It may be many days
before she feeds again.

Only the most competitive

will survive the perils
of the mountain winter.

An avalanche,
nine million tonnes of snow

travelling at 120 kilometres an hour,

capable of smashing
everything in its path.

The mountains of North America

are hit by thousands of
avalanches every year.

Yet, one animal spends the whole winter

slumbering within the snow
on these avalanche-prone slopes.

And when spring comes, they emerge.

All across these mountains,

grizzly bears make their winter dens
up to 3,000 metres high

in the deep snow of leeward slopes.

And while they were
half asleep in the depths of winter,

their young were born.

Now, these cubs are taking their
first steps into the outside world.

This mother is leading
her three youngsters

to a place where they can find food.

They need to descend
as quickly as possible.

The debris from an avalanche
is clear evidence

that this slope is still
dangerously unstable.

This is not a place to dawdle.

And they have another reason
to keep moving.

After five months in the den,
these bears are very hungry.

Bears that have hibernated
throughout these peaks

now all descend to the valleys,

where spring comes earliest.

In the Rockies, seasonal change
is swift and dramatic.

In just a few days, the slopes
turn from white to green.

Meadows that only a few weeks ago
were buried beneath the snow

are now full of life.

But in these mountains,
the good times will not last long.

So the bears must feed
as fast as they can.

During the summer months,

an adult can put on 180 kilos,
gorging on plants.

And if they can catch them...

...a marmot or two.

But, just now, the bears have
something else on their minds.

It's becoming warmer,

and the bears are keen
to shed their thick winter coats.

Mothers show the cubs
what to do about this.

They'll soon catch on.

Some trees, it seems,
are particularly suitable for rubbing.

Bears have their favourites,

and will travel
long distances to visit them.

Some itches just have to be scratched.

There are now around
30 bears in this one valley.

As they rub, each leaves an individual
and recognisable scent.

So the tree soon
carries a list of who's around.

Which might help individuals
to avoid a fight.

To best spread their scent.

they really have to put
their back into it.

But the summer is short.

Itches satisfactorily scratched,

it's time to eat.

In a couple of months,

they will have to return
to their dens to hibernate.

So now they must put on
as much weight as they can.

Winter in the mountains returns fast
and hits hard.

Temperature in the Rockies
will drop to -65 degrees.

So cold, that moisture in the air
freezes into tiny crystals

called diamond dust.

This bobcat

is one of the few hunters
to remain active in winter.

Most of his prey
is now hidden beneath the snow

that covers his entire territory.

He hunts by listening for the faintest
sound of movement.

And to prevent crunching footsteps
from revealing his presence,

he uses boulders as stepping stones.

A mouse.

But one is not enough.

The deeper the snow,
the harder it is to detect prey,

and the rewards for the effort
can be disappointing.

To say the least.

By mid-winter, the snow is so deep,

the bobcats are forced
to leave their territories

to try and find easier hunting.

And this bobcat may be in luck,

for this particular valley is blessed.

A river here never freezes.

It's fed by a volcanic hot spring
that heats these waters

to 50 degrees warmer
than the surrounding air.

Hungry animals of all kinds
come here to feed.

Throughout the winter,
the river is full of food

for those who know how to catch it.

Here, even the coyotes
have become fishermen.

But hunting is hard for a cat
that's not used in getting its feet wet.

So he must choose his target with care.

Goldeneye ducks.

But can he get close enough to pounce?

Perhaps he'll have
more luck on the other side.

Here, steam from the river
warms the surrounding trees.

So, up in the branches,
there could be prey.

If only he could get to it.

It's six metres up.

At last, a squirrel.

Not much, but enough to keep him going.

To survive a winter in these mountains
takes tenacity,

and bobcats have that in abundance.

Snow on the equator.

Unlike the Rockies,

in these mountains
there are no marked seasons.

This is Africa's Mount Kenya.

It's over 5, 000 metres high,
which makes its summit

some 50 degrees colder
than the surrounding savannah.

Giant heathers, lobelias and groundsel
grow on its upper slopes.

They all thrive in the tropical sun.

After all, every day is summer.

But once the sun sets, every night
becomes as bitterly cold as winter.

The temperature drops
to five degrees below freezing...

...turning the mountainside
into a garden of ice.

Everything freezes.

But the cabbage groundsels
have a way of protecting themselves.

They close up their leathery leaves
to form an insulating blanket

that shields their vulnerable
central bud.

Night comes to an end...

...and the sunshine returns.

The groundsels spread their leaves wide
to bask in the sunshine once again.

Dawn, in the high Andes...

Here too, the rising sun
brings rapid relief

to animals living amongst
these volcanic peaks.

Mountain viscacha
are up early to claim the best places

to catch the sun's first rays.

For others up here,
the sunrise is even more welcome.

At over 4,000 metres,

this is the highest
flamingo colony in the world.

At night, it gets so cold
that even this salty water freezes over.

And now the flamingos
are trapped in the ice.

Eventually, the sun thins the ice.

But it's still a struggle
for the flamingos to break free.

Walking on thin ice is always risky.

And it's hard to retain one's dignity,

especially when you're wearing stilts.

At these altitudes,

the sun's power can quickly
turn from salvation to threat.

The atmosphere is so thin,

there is very little protection
from ultraviolet radiation.

By mid-morning,
it's risky to linger out in the open.

The viscacha are forced
to head for the shade.

Out on the lake,
there is nowhere to hide.

The white crust of the Soda Lake
reflects the sun's glare

and increases the impact
of its ultraviolet rays.

By mid-day, uncovered
human skin will burn in four minutes.

But this doesn't seem
to bother the flamingos.

In fact, they are on parade.

During the breeding season,

the flamingos perform
these peculiar courtship dances

even through the hottest
time of the day.

They're so eager,
they don't even pause to feed.

The rules are something of a mystery,
but after a month of dancing

all the birds will have paired off
and will be getting ready to mate.

Up here, there are few other
creatures to bother the flamingos.

But then, few other creatures
could even tolerate these conditions.

So, for animals
that have the endurance,

mountains can be sanctuaries.

But rocky peaks, which to us, perhaps,
seem a symbol of permanence,

are more fragile than they appear.

Today, in the Alps,

human encroachment
is changing even the highest summits.

In the Rockies, rising temperatures
are shortening winter hibernation

and stifling the growth
of valuable food plants.

And in the Andes,
some glaciers have shrunk

by 50% in just 30 years.

Even the Himalayas are now vulnerable.

With most of the world's tallest peaks

and covering a million
square kilometres,

this is the greatest
mountain range of all.

And here, temperatures are now
rising faster than the global average.

As the snow line retreats
further and further up these peaks,

there is less
and less space for wildlife.

And that is a challenge

for one of the most majestic
of all mountain creatures.

The snow leopard.

Seldom seen.

The detail of their lives
has long been a mystery.

But now at last, helped by
the latest remote camera technology,

we're getting closer to them
than ever before.

They're very rare.

Only about four of them
in a hundred square kilometres.

There is simply not enough prey
to sustain more.

They live solitary lives.

Nonetheless, they are well aware

of the presence
and the movements of their neighbours

because they leave messages
in a few special places.

They rub particular rocks
with their cheeks.

And they spray them with urine.

The two perfumes
create a unique signature.

Any other leopard can know
which of its neighbours passed this way,

without ever making direct contact.

But there are times
when snow leopards must come together

and the event is often violent.

An adult female and her daughter.

She has devoted the last two years
to raising her cub,

and very soon, it will be weaned.

For now, the cub is still
entirely dependent on its mother.

But staying together as long as this
could cause problems.

The female is now in heat again,

and any male that
smells her signature will know that.

From this moment on,
her cub's life is at risk.

Males kill cubs that are not their own.

But the mother is now driven
by an urge that she cannot control.

She lets the males know exactly
where she is.

From up here,
she can be heard from miles around.

A young male emerges from
the wilderness, eager to find her.

Snow leopards meet so infrequently
that there is uncertainty and tension.

And it's about to get worse.

Another bigger male has arrived.

The mother and cub
are trapped between the rivals.

The cub is now in danger.
Mother must act fast.

To divert the males' attention
from her cub,

she rolls over submissively.

With the males fixed on the female,
the cub has a chance to escape.

The males close in
on the mother from both sides,

keen to claim her for their own.

A fight is inevitable.

The female moves
to escape and protect her cub.

But the big male follows her.

He will not let her leave
until he has mated with her.

With the males gone, the female
is at last reunited with her cub.

But she has been injured.

The cub, however, is alive,
thanks to its mother.

Until her injury heals,
she won't be able to hunt.

Mountain animals survive on
the very edge of existence.

Mother and cub were not seen again.

Until, over a month later,

high on a ridge,
a remote camera was triggered.

The female cat.

She's no longer limping
but she's now alone.

Then an hour after the female has left,
the camera is triggered again.

It's her cub, taking her first steps
towards adulthood and independence.

She is unlikely to see her mother again.

But every now and then,
they will be reunited

through the messages they leave
on the marking rocks.

Her mother has succeeded
in raising her,

but life ahead will be challenging,

and she will spend
nearly all of it alone.

Only the toughest can survive

among the savage beauty
of the world's highest mountains.

Next time,
we explore the world's jungles.

Places of surprise and invention
unrivalled on Earth...

where the battle for survival
is at its most intense.Earth is the only planet

we know of where life exists.

- And here, it does so in abundance.
{BIRDS CHIRPING)

The jungle is Eden.

It covers less than 6%
of the Earth's surface,

but it's home to half of all
the plants and animals on land.

jungles have just the right amount
of light, water and nutrients,

and they have had
every day for millennia.

Life here should be easy.

This is an indri.

It's a primate like us,

and these forests in Madagascar
are its home.

But to survive here

it has to face one major challenge.

Paradise is crowded.

Life fills every niche.

And at any one time,

a staggering variety of species
and countless individuals

are striving for space and food.

Like every jungle animal,

indri have to find their own way
to survive

in the most competitive place on Earth.

jungles are complex places.

Tangled, three-dimensional worlds
created by lush tropical vegetation.

90% of the animals here
spend their whole lives up in the trees,

and each of them has to find
its own way of getting around.

Hanging 30 metres above the ground,

a spider monkey.

They travel in family groups
and find everything they need

in the top storey of the jungle.

Up here isn't a place
for the faint-hearted.

With long limbs and a prehensile tail
that can grip like a hand,

they're built for climbing.

But imagine having to learn these skills
as high up as this.

One-third of spider monkeys
never make it to adulthood.

This youngster is only a few months old.

Her future depends on
her ability to climb.

Playing on a practice tree
with her older brother and sister,

she's already learning to use her tail
as a safety line...

...under her father's close watch.

She's keen to join in the game,

but she's the youngest
and, as is the way of things,

she's not always welcome.

So she chooses her own place to play.

But not all trees are the same.

This one is for more advanced climbers.

Enthusiasm?

Certainly.

Technique?

Room for improvement.

Meanwhile, some of her family
have moved on

to look for a new patch of fresh food.

The top of the canopy
isn't for youngsters.

But father's not looking

And the temptation to join
the others is irresistible.

She'll need to be careful.

A fall from here
will mean certain death.

It's the first time she's been
as high as this on her own.

As she climbs still higher,
the branches get thinner and thinner.

Her tail has caught her.

But now she's stuck in mid-air,
unable to reach any other branch.

Father, however, was watching.

He's big and strong enough
to form a bridge with his body

so that she can climb to safety.

Lesson learned.

But it's not just monkeys
that live here up in the treetops.

And if you are small,

finding the right tree
can mean a home for life.

He's a Draco lizard.

He's only the size of a pencil
and he eats ants.

This one tree could provide him
with all he will ever need.

A conveyor belt of food.

It's a perfect place to settle down.

Well, it would be...

...but there's already someone here.

This larger male is the tree's owner

and Dracos don't share.

The owner's flag is a warning.

Trespassers won't be tolerated.

The owner's not only intimidating,

he's prepared to battle.

A dead end.

Safety is a long way away.

Now he must choose.

Fight?

Or flee?

Only in the jungle do you find lizards
that can soar like dragons.

He can travel over 30 metres
in a single leap.

It's a very fast and efficient way
to move through the jungle.

Maybe this new tree will have food

and no resident owner.

Everything in the jungle
has to compete for space.

Only 2% of the sun's rays
reach the ground,

so even the plants must battle

for the light they need
if they're to grow.

500 years ago, this hura tree
began its race for light,

and, every day since, it has absorbed
the water and sunshine it needed

to grow into a giant.

It has succeeded in doing
what every tree must do to survive.

Rise above the gloom
of the jungle floor.

And, what is more, its success
has given life to others.

Its branches now carry
a thousand other plants.

These particular ferns, figs and orchids

live only on the branches
of other trees.

A thousand plants
growing on one single tree.

Throughout the forest,
this story is repeated endless times.

As a consequence, jungles are home
to more species of plants

than anywhere else on Earth.

And they, in turn,
support a wealth of animals.

In Ecuador the competition
is at its most intense.

Here they are a hundred species
of hummingbirds alone.

All fighting for nectar.

Each flower only has a small amount
at any one time

and so it's first come, first served.

One hummingbird
has gone to great lengths

to avoid conflict with other species.

Sword-bills are the only bird
with a beak longer than their body.

And some flowers are too elongated

for the other 99 species
of hummingbirds here to feed from them.

A sword-bill's
extraordinary beak, however,

enables it to reach the places
that others can't.

The top of this flower,
where the sweet nectar is produced.

It has found a solution that means
it doesn't have to join the fight.

And as each long flower blooms,

it gives the sword-bill a fresh supply
of food all to itself.

But having a beak longer than your body
does have its drawbacks.

For a start,
it's tricky to keep it clean.

Harder still, how do
you preen your body feathers?

Unlike the other hummers,

wword-bills can't reach their feathers
with their beak.

The only option,

a good old scratch.

It's a little unrefined,

but a small price to pay
for an exclusive food supply.

Especially when feeding times are only
too frequently interrupted by storms.

jungles are the richest places on Earth
because of one remarkable fact.

They make their own weather.

Every day water rises from the surface
of the leaves as vapour.

It's as if the trees breathe out clouds.

They gather over the forest,
until, finally...

...they burst.

Rain is the lifeblood of every jungle.

And all have to do their best
to endure the daily downpour.

In some jungles, like here in Brazil,

it rains so much that
for part of the year,

the trees are almost totally submerged.

The forest floor is ten metres
below the water's surface.

This is a mysterious world.

A place few people have ever explored.

We have much to discover about
the animals for which this is home.

Including some you might never
expect to find amongst trees.

One and a half thousand kilometres
from the sea,

are dolphins.

A newly identified species
of river dolphin

found nowhere else on Earth.

In these black, tangled waters,
they have become almost totally blind,

so they move slowly,

carefully using their sonar
to scan the forest floor for fish.

If this forest can hide
a new species of dolphin,

what else might there be here,
awaiting discovery?

At the shallow margins
of the flooded jungle,

rivers flow through lush vegetation.

Here, food is so abundant,
it supports giants.

Capybara, the biggest rodents
in the world.

Giant otters, the size of a man.

And the rulers of these rivers.

Caiman.

They grow to ten feet long,

and kill anything
they get between their jaws.

But there are more artful hunters

drawn here from the surrounding forest.

A jaguar, the supreme jungle predator.

The river marks
the edge of his territory.

But here, he has competition.

He's now in the territory of a female.

She has ruled this stretch of river
for five years.

This is her place to hunt.

Capybara are strong and wary.

The key is stealth.

She needs to get within a metre
if she's to pounce.

Not this time.

She's not the only female here.

Each part of this jungle's edge
is ruled by a different queen.

Few places on Earth have enough food
to support so many big cats.

The male hunts in a different way.

Weighing almost 150 kilos,
it's hard to be stealthy.

And with so many other jaguars around,

he doesn't bother with wary capybara.

He seeks a different prey.

He's become a killer of killers.

jaguars have the most powerful bite...

- ...of any cat.

And he knows
the caiman's most vulnerable point,

the back of its skull.

Hunters living in the dense
understorey of the jungle

come in all shapes and sizes,

but they share a problem.

How to tell what is a plant
and what is prey.

This is a game of hide and seek,

that can be won or lost
in the blink of an eye.

The long contest
between predator and prey

has produced mimicry
of astounding accuracy.

A leaf-tailed gecko
masquerading as lichen.

Some animals take camouflage
a stage further still.

And these streams in Costa Rica
are home to one of the most remarkable.

A glass frog.

A male, and tiny,
no bigger than your fingernail,

and almost entirely transparent.

As he needs to be.

Almost everything that walks past here
could eat him.

Even a cricket.

His best chance
is to stay absolutely still,

and trust that the cricket
looks right through him.

Danger passed,

and that's just as well,

because he is a father.

And he's guarding
some very precious eggs.

For the last few weeks,
females, one after the other,

have visited him
and entrusted him with their offspring.

Some are now almost ready to hatch.

There are several clutches on the leaf,

and those at the top,
the most recently laid,

are barely a day old.

But in the jungle,
there's always someone out to get you.

This wasp is a specialist hunter
of frog's eggs.

It's noticed the wriggling tadpoles
at the bottom of the leaf.

He mustn't move.

The youngest eggs
are the most vulnerable,

and he can't guard them all.

But these tadpoles are not as helpless
as they might appear.

Incredibly, the un-hatched tadpoles
can sense danger,

and the oldest and strongest
wriggle free,

and drop into the stream below.

The eggs at the top
of the leaf, however,

are still too young to hatch,

and now the wasps know they're there.

But the male's back looks very like
the youngest cluster of eggs.

And that seems to confuse the wasps.

Using his on body as decoy
is a huge risk.

The wasps' stings could kill him.

He's managed to save most of his young.

He'll have to remain on guard
for another two weeks.

But in the jungle,
just surviving the day

can count as a SUCCESS.

With the coming of the night,

a new cast of jungle characters
takes to the stage.

Flying insects begin to glow
as they search for mates.

Fungi, unlike plants,

thrive in the darkness
of the forest floor.

They're hidden, until they begin
to develop the incredible structures

with which they reproduce.

Each releases
millions of microscopic spores

that drift invisibly away.

Many have fruiting bodies
that reach upwards

to catch any feeble current
there might be

in the clammy air.

But this one, as it grows,
becomes luminous.

Why fungi light up
has remained a mystery...

...until now.

Scientists studying
the brightest fungi in the world

think they may have an answer.

Like a beacon,
the light attracts insects...

...from far and wide.

To this click beetle,

a bright light means only one thing,

a female click beetle.

So, he flashes in reply.

But he doesn't get
the reception he was expecting.

Confused, he starts
searching for a female

and that helps the fungus.

By the time he gives up,

he's covered in the fungus' spores.

And as he continues
his quest for a female,

he carries these spores
to other parts of the forest.

And there are even stranger things
glowing in the jungle night.

These are the multi-coloured lights
of a railroad worm.

It's not really a worm,

but a poisonous,
caterpillar-like beetle.

The yellow lights warn other creatures
to keep out of its way.

It's hunting for millipedes.

When it finds the trail of one,

it switches off its yellow lights.

Now, it only has
a red light on its head.

Millipedes can't see red light.

So, to them,
the railroad worm in stealth mode

is virtually invisible.

And that is the end of the millipede.

Competition in the jungles

forces animals to specialise
in every aspect of their life,

including courtship.

This has produced
some of the most beautiful

and elaborate displays on the planet.

A male red bird-of-paradise

competing to attract
a female by dancing.

One has come to survey what's on offer.

She is an independent lady

and she will select
whichever male takes her fancy.

She makes her choice.

But now she doesn't seem quite so sure.

No.

Perhaps he's just a little too keen.

Maybe he'll have better luck tomorrow.

Red birds-of-paradise
display in the tree tops.

Other members of the family
dance in the gloom of the forest floor.

This is a Wilson's bird-of-paradise.

He's brightly coloured,

but about the size of a sparrow.

He's lived most of his life alone.

But now he's an adult,

and he too needs to attract a mate.

This little patch of light
might help him do so.

First, he tidies things up.

Showing off in this jumble of leaves
wouldn't be easy,

and his beauty will stand out better
against a plain background.

He doesn't want bright leaves
to divert a visitor's attention.

They all need to go.

Even the green ones.

Especially the green ones.

His stage is set.

A central pole
and a little patch of light...

It's perfect.

And now he must hope
a female hears his call.

He can wait here for weeks on end.

At last, a female.

Time to take up position.

She will judge him
by the brightness of his feathers.

But for the female
to see him at his best,

he needs her to perch
directly above his stage,

under the light.

This might be his only chance to shine.

Now, when she's looking
directly down on him,

he reveals a display for her eyes only.

In the gloom of the forest floor,

he is a dazzling blaze
of iridescent green.

The brightest "leaf" in the forest.

And that does the trick.

Each animal must find its own way

of surviving the competition
of the jungle.

This crowded world
is so full of invention

that almost all kinds of animals on land
can trace their origins back here...

Including us.

These forests in Madagascar
are home to one of our distant cousins.

This female indri has fought
to keep this particular patch of forest

safe for herself and her family.

Every morning, the family
come together to sing,

their way of reminding others
that this is their home.

Indri are so closely adapted
to living here,

that now they can live nowhere else.

For them, and the billions of animals
with whom they share their home,

the jungle is a sanctuary.

But this is changing.

Even in the ten years
since the head of this family was born,

ten thousand square kilometres of
the rainforest have been destroyed

in Madagascar alone,

and, with it, half the indri families
that once lived there.

The local people say
the indris are our brothers

and their song is a call to remind us

that we too once depended on the jungle.

This Eden is still a place
of wonder and magic.

Something surely worth protecting.

Next time...

A land of extremes,
that pushes life to the limit.

Animals have extraordinary ways
of dealing with the hostile conditions.

Creating the most epic
survival stories on Earth...

These are deserts.
Imagine a world

where temperatures rise
to 50 degrees Centigrade,

where there's no escape
from sun, wind and dust.

Imagine a world
with almost no food or water.

These are the conditions
in one-third of the lands of our planet.

To live here

demands the most extraordinary
survival strategies.

This is the oldest desert in the world.

The Namib in southwest Africa.

It's been dry for 55 million years.

Life here for a hunter
is as hard as it gets.

A pride of lions,

one of the very few

that endures
this desert's scorching temperatures

and lack of water.

Hunting here presents special problems.

A herd of oryx,

the only prey within 30 kilometres.

Out here,
there is no cover for an ambush.

It will have to be a straight chase.

They have failed,

and each failed hunt
brings the lions closer to starvation.

To find enough to eat,

the pride continually searches
an area the size of Switzerland.

Three days and 150 kilometres later,

and still, no kill.

These are desperate times.

A dry riverbed
on the edge of their territory.

The only animals here are giraffe.

But these one-tonne giants
could kill a lion

with a single kick.

Lions seldom tackle
such formidable prey.

But this pride can't go on much longer

- without food.

The whole pride
must work together as a team,

if they're to succeed.

Two lionesses lead the chase.

Others race to cut off
possible escape routes.

The giraffe has the speed and stamina
to outrun the pride.

But it's being chased into a trap.

Up ahead, the lead female waits.

It's now up to her.

(MGM

Most lion hunts end in failure.

But no lions fail more often
than those that live in the desert.

Once again,

the pride must continue their search.

It does sometimes rain in the desert.

Here in the American West,

storms can strike
with devastating force.

After 10 months of drought,
millions of tonnes of water

are dumped on the land in under an hour.

Over millions of years,

sand and gravel
carried by the rampaging floods

have carved channels
through the solid rock.

Salt canyons, 50 metres deep.

In some places,
these canyons have widened

until the land between them is sculpted
into table lands and isolated pinnacles,

some of the most
dramatic landscapes on the planet.

The rain may be long gone,

but there is water here,

locked away within the tissues
of specialist desert plants.

Cacti are unique to American deserts.

They all hoard water,
storing it in swollen stems,

and protecting it
behind a barricade of spines.

They're so successful
that they dominate these deserts.

But this forest of spikes

can cause problems
for the animals that live here.

A Harris hawk.

It has developed special techniques
for hunting amongst the cacti.

Ground squirrels.

Prey.

At the first sign of danger,
they bolt for the safety of the thorns.

But the hawks have a tactic
to flush them out.

These are the only birds of prey
that hunt in packs.

Flying in formation,

they try to drive their quarry
into the open.

But this squirrel is staying put.

So now the hawks continue the hunt

on foot.

They're closing in from all sides.

Soon, all escape routes are cut off.

The squirrel is trapped.

The spines that cover
almost every plant in this desert

can provide protection and shelter
for many animals.

So, why should these spikes
be hung with corpses?

What kind of creature
could be responsible

for creating such a gruesome scene?

There's a mysterious killer
at work in this desert.

It's a butcher bird.

This little song bird uses the spines
as a butcher uses his hook,

to hold its prey as it dismembers it.

And with chicks to feed,
he also uses the spines as a larder.

He's been stocking it for weeks.

Hanging his prey out of the reach
of scavengers on the ground

ensures that his newly-hatched young
will never go hungry.

An ingenious solution

to making the good times
last in the desert,

if a little macabre.

Some deserts are so arid,

they appear totally devoid
of all vegetation.

Yet even these landscapes

can be transformed

in a matter of days.

The deserts of Peru
are amongst the driest in the world.

But just add a little water,

and plants
that have lain dormant for months

will burst into life.

And when a desert suddenly turns green,

even the most seemingly desolate

can become a land of opportunity.

No creature exploits
the greening of a desert more quickly,

or more dramatically,

than a locust.

Madagascar's arid southwest

has received
its highest rainfall in years.

Now, an army is on the march,

attracted by the smell
of newly-sprouting grass.

Locusts are normally solitary creatures,

but when food becomes
suddenly plentiful,

they come together
into an unstoppable force

that devours everything in its path.

But this devastation
is about to get a lot worse.

The locusts now transform
into winged adults.

And with conditions as good as this,

they do so three times
faster than normal.

Now, they are at their most voracious.

And with wings,
they can take to the skies.

Once airborne, the locusts can travel
over 100 kilometres a day

in their search for new feeding grounds.

A super-swarm of this scale
may only appear once in a decade.

This one extends
over 500 square kilometres

and contains
several billion individuals.

Between them, they will devour
40,000 tonnes of food in a day.

Nothing can strip a land
of its vegetation with such speed

and thoroughness as a plague of locusts.

When the food eventually runs out,
the whole army will die.

But not before it's devastated the land.

With no plants to bind them,

thin soils soon turn to dust
and blow away.

Now, these barren lands
are left to the mercy of the elements.

Scorched by the sun
and scoured by windblown sand,

desert rock is shaped into strange,
otherworldly landscapes.

These rocky deserts
may have a beguiling beauty,

but when they become this barren,
very little life can endure.

For many animals,

the only way to survive
the most hostile times

is to keep moving.

In the Kalahari,

brief rains have given way
to the dry season.

Food and water
are becoming increasingly scarce.

For these zebra, it's time to leave.

They are setting off
on the longest over-land migration

made by any mammal in Africa,

marching towards the scent
of distant rains.

As drought intensifies,

desert-living elephants
must also undertake long journeys

in search of water.

The older females can remember where,
even in times of extreme drought,

there may still be water,

and sometimes lead the herd

to a waterhole they may not
have visited for decades.

These zebra are almost
at the end of their journey.

This is what they've been heading for.

A rare waterhole.

In deserts,
most waterholes are short-lived.

They appear after rains,

but then vanish
almost as quickly as they came.

Animals have come here
from many kilometres around.

Yet, this can be a dangerous place
in which to linger.

A hundred kilometres away,
in the heart of the desert,

sandgrouse chicks are hatching.

It's safer for them to be here.

But being so distant
from water is a gamble.

With only their mother
to shield them from the sun,

if they get nothing to drink,

they will be dead within hours.

Their only hope is their father.

Every morning,
he makes the 200-kilometre round trip

to get water for the family.

Grouse from all over the desert
visit this oasis,

arriving together in large flocks.

And that is important.

There's safety in numbers.

The male snatches a drink,

but he also needs to collect
water for his chicks.

Using specially-adapted breast feathers,

he can soak up water like a sponge.

But it takes time,

and he is in danger.

Goshawk.

Sandgrouse here are their main prey.

Again and again,

the male sandgrouse risk their lives

in order to collect water
for their chicks.

This is why sandgrouse
nest so far from waterholes.

At last,

he's soaked up as much as he can.

Carrying a quarter
of his bodyweight in water,

he can now set off
on the long journey home.

He's back, and just in time.

He can give the chicks
their first-ever drink.

But he will have to undertake
this perilous journey

every day for the next two months,

until his chicks

can finally make the flight
to the waterhole for themselves.

It's July in the deserts of Nevada

in the western United States.

The hottest time of the year.

Bands of wild horses, mustang,

are converging on one of the last
remaining waterholes around.

Now, water not only offers them
the chance to drink.

It can also bring power.

If a stallion can control
access to water,

he will have secured mating rights
to the entire herd.

So stallions
try to dominate these pools,

fighting off rivals
who venture too close.

A stranger.

He's travelled 15 kilometres to be here

because the pools where he's come from
have already dried up.

With him come his females.

If he can't provide them with water,

they will leave him
for the white stallion

who already dominates this pool.

So he will have to fight.

There is everything to lose.

A broken leg or a shattered jaw
would mean a slow and painful death.

A missed kick,

and it's all over.

The new arrival has won.

And his prize
is more than just a chance to drink.

He has provided for his herd,
and in the process,

stolen his rival's females.

The white stallion's rule is over.

Desert life is not only shaped
by the scarcity of water,

but also by the relentless power

of the sun.

The highest temperatures on Earth
have all been recorded in its deserts.

Changes in the climate

mean temperatures here
are rising more than the global average.

And as deserts heat up,

they are also expanding.

Every year,

a further 150,000 square kilometres
of grass and farmland

are turning into barren stretches
of dust and rock.

In the heat of the day,

surface temperatures
can reach a scorching 70 degrees,

far too hot to handle for most.

But not for this shovel-snouted lizard.

Raising its feet off the ground in turn

enables each to briefly cool.

But even this dancing desert specialist

can't stand the heat for long.

One option is to find shade.

Dune grass, the only vegetation here,
provides virtually none.

But just beneath
the surface of the sand,

it is several degrees cooler.

Avoiding the extreme heat
imposes a rhythm on desert life.

And many animals here
choose the simplest option of all,

staying hidden all day

and only venturing out
in the cool of the night.

As darkness falls,

animals appear from seemingly nowhere.

And among them, inevitably,

are hunters.

One of the most voracious
nocturnal predators

is also one of the hardest to see.

This mysterious creature

hardly ever appears
on the surface of the dunes.

But there are signs on the sand
that can give it away.

It lives only here,

where the sand grains
are so perfectly dry and polished

that they flow almost like water.

It's no bigger than a Ping-Pong ball.

A golden mole.

It's totally blind,

but there's nothing
to see underground anyway.

Instead, it has superb hearing.

Its entire head acts as an amplifier

that picks up vibrations
through the sand.

So, to locate prey
on the surface of the dune,

it has, paradoxically,
to thrust its face into the dune.

Termites.

Not easy to catch when you're blind.

Far better to go into stealth mode.

Once below the sand,

it can detect the slightest movement,

allowing it to strike
with pinpoint accuracy.

Well, most of the time.

It can travel two-thirds of a mile
a night in search of its dinner.

And right now,
it has just detected its main course.

Little wonder it's sometimes called
"the shark of the dunes".

Food can be so scarce in the desert

that even at night,
animals can't afford to be choosy

about what they eat.

Israel's Negev Desert.

Otonycteris, the desert long-eared bat,

is on the hunt.

Most bats
catch flying insects on the wing.

But there are so few of these
in the desert

that this bat
must do things differently.

It has to hunt on the ground.

But what really sets it apart

is what it's hunting.

A deathstalker scorpion.

The venom of this species
is potent enough to kill a human.

Tackling it seems madness
for a bat weighing just 15 grams.

In the pitch black,

both predator and prey
are effectively blind.

But the scorpion has one advantage,

he can sense the approach of the bat
through vibrations in the sand.

Otonycteris must rely
entirely on its hearing.

If the scorpion doesn't move,
it won't know it's there.

The battle is on.

Armed with crushing pincers
and a sting loaded with venom,

this scorpion is a dangerous opponent.

A direct strike on the head.

Is it all over?

Not for this bat.

Otonycteris clearly has some immunity
to the venom,

but repeated stings
must still be extraordinarily painful.

And if the bat is not to go hungry,

it must catch another three scorpions
before sunrise.

Desert animals
have developed remarkable strategies

to make the most
of the rare opportunities

that come their way.

Although some deserts
may not see rain for several years,

most will hold a little water
in one form or another.

The trick
is simply knowing how to reach it.

Dawn in the dunes of the Namib,

and something magical is happening.

Moist air
lying over the neighbouring Atlantic

is cooled and blown inland,

forming fog banks
that shroud the desert in mist.

This precious moisture

lies tantalisingly out of reach
at the top of the dunes,

and it won't last long.

It will be burnt off by the sun
just hours after it rises.

Darkling beetles
race to the top of the dunes

to reach the fog before it vanishes.

Some of the Namib's dunes
are 300 metres high,

the tallest in the world.

For a beetle no larger than a thumbnail,

this is the equivalent
of us climbing a dune

twice the height of Everest.

But even more impressive

is what it does next.

Standing perfectly still,
facing into the wind,

the beetle does a headstand.

Fog begins to condense on its body.

Microscopic bumps on its wing cases

direct the water to grooves
that channel it towards the mouth.

Before returning down the slip face,

it will drink 40% of its body weight.

This little beetle

has learned how to conjure water
out of the air

in one of the driest places on Earth.

And it's not alone
on the top of the dunes.

Web-footed geckos use a similar trick.

Surely, few animals
go to greater lengths to get a drink.

Unfortunately, Namaqua chameleons
know that on foggy mornings,

the beetles coming down the dunes
are juicier than those going up.

The diversity of life

that thrives in a world
almost totally devoid of water

is truly remarkable.

Success in the desert

depends on an extraordinary variety
of survival strategies

that have evolved
over millions of years.

But our planet is changing.

The world's deserts
are growing bigger, hotter and drier,

and they're doing so
faster than ever before.

How life will cope here in the future

remains to be seen.

Next time,
we journey to the world's Great Plains.

Where spectacular gatherings of wildlife

cope with extreme change.

And surprising creatures survive

in unexpected ways.
One quarter of all the land on Earth

is covered by a single,
remarkable type of plant.

Almost indestructible,
it can grow half a metre a day...

...and be tall enough to hide a giant.

That plant is grass,

and the world it creates
is truly unique.

The grass in northern India
is the tallest on the planet,

home to some of the most
impressive creatures to tread the Earth.

These are the good times,

but in just a few months,
all this fresh growth will be gone,

and the animals
will be forced to move on.

That is the way things are
on grasslands across the planet.

A cycle of abundance,
destruction and rebirth

that affects every creature
that lives here.

The largest grassland on Earth,
the vast Eurasian Steppe,

stretches one third of the way
around our planet.

Spring rain has brought fresh grass,
and with it, new life.

A relic from the Ice Age,
a baby Saiga antelope,

just three hours old.

His only company, his twin.

Until they can stand, their mother
has left them hidden in the grass.

They should be safe,
as long as they remain quiet.

For these calves,
the clock is already ticking.

Their herd will soon be moving on,
seeking the freshest new grass.

Their lanky legs are a sure sign that
they're built for a life on the move.

Saiga always give birth to twins,

so their numbers grow rapidly
just when grass is plentiful.

Their bizarrely shaped nose
can detect fresh growth

from hundreds of kilometres away.

The young twins will now
begin the nomadic life

they share with most animals
on the world's open plains.

Grasslands occur where rain is
too sporadic for forests to exist.

The rain that a grassland
needs to survive for a year

might arrive all at once.

Storms like these can release
30 centimetres of rain in 24 hours.

Not much fun if you're out in it.

Eventually the earth
can't soak up any more,

and the grassland undergoes
a radical change.

Many plants would drown here,
but grasses thrive.

They grow so fast,

their leaves quickly rise above
the water and into the sunlight.

Here in southern Africa,

water transforms one of the most
remarkable grasslands on Earth,

the Okavango.

Every year, 8,000 square kilometres
of grassland are flooded.

For one pride of lions,
this poses a major problem.

There may be plenty of prey around,

but lions struggle
to run it down in water.

The pride has three-month-old cubs.
They've never seen water before.

If their mothers
don't make a kill soon,

the cubs might not survive the week.

But fuelled by the flood, the eruption
of grass attracts new possible prey.

Buffalo arrive in herds 2,000 strong.

Powerful, aggressive and united,

they're the most dangerous animal
a lion can face.

The biggest bulls don't run.

They're simply too huge
to be scared of lions.

At 900 kilos, he weighs more
than all five lionesses combined.

The pride do have numbers on their side,

but one sweep of his horns
could be deadly.

One distracts the bull up front,
while her sisters attack from behind.

The cats must somehow
topple the buffalo,

but with swamp under foot,
they can't get any traction.

The bull is weakening,

but the lions are tiring, too.

It's now a battle of will
as much as strength.

To live, the bull must somehow
shake off the lioness.

The bull is wounded,

but thanks to his thick hide,
he will recover.

For the pride, these are hungry times.

But, ultimately, once the water recedes,
there will be new life,

and new food to benefit all.

In the right conditions,
grasses have the extraordinary ability

to grow from first shoots to flower
in a matter of only days.

Grasses become the miniature equivalents
of fruiting trees.

And for creatures living
within the grass,

this is a landscape as vast
and towering as any rainforest.

An excellent place
to build a tiny tree house

for a harvest mouse.

During summer,
European meadowlands are full of food,

but only for those that can reach it.

Climbing grass is harder
than climbing trees,

not least because their stems
just won't stay still.

Her prehensile tail
acts like a fifth limb,

so she's as agile as a monkey
clambering around in a tree.

And just as well,

for the best food in this tiny forest
is at the very top of its canopy.

Feeding up here, she's exposed.

A barn owl.

Not her finest move...

But it did the trick.

Harvest mice seldom go
all the way down to the ground.

It's a tangled and
dangerous world down here.

But she can read the pattern
of the stems overhead like a map,

and so find her way home.

And not a minute too soon.

There are mouths to feed.

Her babies must fatten up quickly.

They need to harvest the summer grasses
while they're still rich with food.

On the African savannah, too,
seasonal grasses are filled with life,

but it won't last long.

Carmine bee-eaters
are superb aerial hunters,

experts at catching insects in mid-air.

But they have no way of
flushing their prey out of the grass.

Once alarmed, most insects stay put.

The bee-eaters need someone
to stir things up a bit.

A kori bustard.

It's the world's heaviest flying bird,

so it should be bulky enough
to kick up some insects.

Bingo!

Until someone else comes along
and cramps your style.

Never mind, perhaps there are
bigger opportunities ahead.

What about an ostrich?

The heaviest bird of all.

This time there's more than enough
transport to go around.

Soon, almost every ostrich
has its own passenger.

But free riders are only
tolerated for so long.

What the bee-eaters really need

is a creature so big
it won't even notice them.

Nothing cuts a swathe through grass
like an African bull elephant.

The trick is to fly as close to
the front of the giant as possible.

They only have a split second
to grab the prize.

As more insects are stirred up,
the competition intensifies.

With summer drawing to a close,
the race to stock up is on.

Soon, the grass will wither,
and this opportunity will have gone.

As the dry season takes hold,

food becomes increasingly thin
on the ground.

Now, only the most specialised predators
on the plains can make a living.

She may be spotted like a cheetah,
but this cat is no sprinter.

Instead, she has extra-long legs
which give her a high vantage point.

But a serval cat's main weapon
are enormous radar ears.

They help her pinpoint prey
hiding in the grass.

But the prey she seeks are canny.

Southern vlei rats.

They know that any sustained movement
can give them away.

So they move in short bursts.

But even the slightest rustle
will give her a clue.

Warm.

Warmer.

Missed.

In better times,
she could catch 70 a day,

but now, with so few rodents around,
she will have to go hungry.

As drought intensifies,
life gets tougher for all.

Predators with permanent territories
must tough it out,

while most of their prey
disappear over the horizon.

To avoid starvation, many grassland
animals follow a nomadic way of life.

Over 2,000,000 wildebeests wander
the East African savannahs

chasing the rains.

And they are not alone.

Arriving on the wing,

Jackson's Widowbirds
also seek fresh grass.

Although, it's not just
food that they're after.

This male wants a mate.

He's grown elaborate breeding plumage
for this moment,

but he needs a stage
on which to show it off.

By carefully selecting grass blades,
each trimmed to the correct length,

he's creating something very special.

He needs an even surface,

and a centre-piece.

The stage is set.

His bachelor pad is sufficiently
neat and tidy to attract a female.

The problem is,

can she see it?

He has competition.

It might take more than a little
gardening to impress the ladies.

jumping is the right idea,

but he's misjudged
the height of the grass.

His rival makes it look easy.

Time to raise his game.

It's not only who jumps the highest,
but who can keep doing so the longest.

Unable to go the distance,
his rivals drop out one by one.

Stamina has won him admirers,

now he can show off
his courtship arena...

And engage in a little
romantic hide-and-seek.

Finally, he's done enough.

The East African savannahs
support millions of grazers.

Each year they devour
millions of tonnes of grass,

and yet there's one creature here

whose impact is far greater
than all these animals combined.

They're found wherever
grass grows on the planet,

yet their labours go
almost entirely unnoticed.

One of the most remarkable is found here
on the grasslands of South America.

These blades are so tough that virtually
no large grass eaters can stomach them.

Yet they're harvested
on an industrial scale...

...by tiny grass cutter ants.

But they themselves
can't digest one bit of it.

So, why bother?

The answer is underground,

and it's very ingenious.

Each blade is cut to length
and placed into a garden of fungus.

The rotting grass feeds the fungus,
and in turn the fungus feeds the ants.

But feeding 5,000,000 workers
requires intensive agriculture.

Luckily, they are an industrious lot.

This colony alone will collect
over half a tonne of grass every year.

With billions of ant colonies
across the world's grasslands

all doing exactly the same thing,
that's a mind-boggling amount of grass.

It's estimated that over one third
of the grass that grows on Earth

will be harvested by an insect.

In northern Australia, termites
memorialise their industry in sculpture.

These astonishing mounds
are three metres tall.

They're always built
on a north-south axis,

which is why their builders
are called compass termites.

These castles of clay

protect their builders
from extremes of heat

and seasonal floods
experienced on many grasslands.

Termites manage to do
what most grass eaters can't,

break down dead grass
and extract the nutrients.

But they themselves can be food
for those that can reach them.

A half-metre-long tongue

covered in microscopic hooks,

followed by claws longer
than those of a velociraptor.

A giant anteater
on the plains of South America.

It can devour 20,000 insects a day.

Powerful forelegs enable it to rip apart
a termite hill with ease.

And as the sun bakes the grass,
the termites face new danger.

In minutes, fire turns grassland to ash.

But the grasses are not dead.
Their underground stems are unharmed.

Weeks, months may pass,

but eventually the rains will return
and the grass will sprout again.

Some grasslands must endure
not only fire, but ice.

As winter approaches, the prairies
of North America begin to freeze.

In summer, bison roamed freely,

almost continuously cropping
the abundant green grass.

Now, that grass is not only withered
and frozen, it's about to be buried.

Sixty million tonnes of snow
now blanket this herd's territory.

Pushing through deep snow
is exhausting work,

and the bison are now slowly starving.

just keeping warm
saps huge amounts of energy.

Their thick coats can insulate them
down to minus 30 Celsius.

It's now minus 40.

The only thing that will keep them alive
is buried beneath a metre of snow.

And that's a problem shared
with a surprising neighbour.

The food the fox seeks
is also deep beneath the snow.

The survival of both creatures depends
on getting through to the ground.

For the bison, it will be
a matter of brute strength.

Massive neck muscles enable them
to shovel five tonnes of snow a day.

Their light-weight neighbour
needs more precision.

The bison have reached their goal,

a mouthful of withered grass.

And where the bison have dug,
the fox now spots an opportunity.

Every footstep counts,

but he mustn't break through...

Yet.

He listens carefully
to pinpoint his target.

It's moving.

A vole.

Small, but 100 times more nutritious
than a mouthful of dried grass.

To get through the winter on these
prairies, sometimes brain beats brawn.

Ultimately, life on all grasslands
depends on the turn of the seasons.

Eight hundred kilometres further north
than any tree can survive,

grass returns to life.

Caribou females have
journeyed to the far north

to calve.

Over 70, 000 caribou babies
will be born in the next few days.

As the calves appear, so too do the
leaves of the newly sprouting grass.

And the calves must strengthen quickly.

Within days they will have to
keep up with their parents

on a never-ending march.

At one day old, they're already faster
than an Olympic sprinter.

They're testing the legs that will
carry them thousands of kilometres,

better to learn their limitations now.

It may look playful, but there's
no harder life on the grasslands

than that facing these infants.

The caribou mothers now join together,

each with an infant
exactly the same age.

They're setting off on the greatest
overland trek made by any animal.

But wherever grass eaters travel,
predators lie in wait.

Here they are, Arctic wolves.

They must seize their chance

while the caribou
pass through their territory.

The wolf runs at the herd, trying to
flush out the weak or the slow.

A calf is separated.

At full tilt, 60 kilometres an hour,
the wolf is just faster.

But the calf has stamina.

Only a few weeks old, and this
calf's will to survive is remarkable.

And it needs to be,

for these young caribou
have now started a journey

that will last a lifetime.

Forever chasing the seasonal growth
of the grass on which they depend.

Like all grassland creatures,
they are at the mercy

of these unpredictable
but ultimately bountiful lands.

Grass can survive some of
the harshest conditions on Earth,

flood, fire and frost,
and still flourish.

So it is that grasslands
provide a stage

for the greatest gatherings of wildlife
on planet Earth.

Next time,

we venture to
the newest habitat on Earth,

our cities.

To reveal the extraordinary ways

that animals survive
in this man-made world.
In the last 6, 000 years

the surface of our planet
has undergone a sudden change.

A new habitat has appeared,

entirely designed and constructed
by one species for its own purpose.

This man-made landscape
may seem alien to animal life

but for the bold, this is a world
of surprising opportunity.

Jodhpur, India.

A gang of bachelor male langurs

has come to challenge
the resident alpha male.

This alpha rules over
a valuable urban territory.

But maintaining dominance here
is a constant struggle.

The bachelors have united
to try and overthrow him.

If they win, one of the challengers

will take over
the alpha 's troop of females,

and may kill his infants.

There are 15 males
in this bachelor group.

The alpha must evict every single
one of them from his territory.

He has chased half the bachelors away,

but a splinter group has looped back
and is harassing his females.

Once again, he has to battle.

Finally, he manages to expel them all.

He returns home victorious,

but with a serious wound
on his right leg.

It's a hard life for him in the city.

Keeping the intruders away
is a daily challenge.

But it's worth it.

For these urban territories

are probably the best
langur territories in the world.

They're filled with
rich feeding grounds.

Here in the temple gardens,

the langurs have, over centuries,
developed a surprising relationship.

One that guarantees them
a constantly replenished source of food.

The people here associate langurs
with the Hindu God, Lord Hanuman,

and revere them.

They're given all the food they can eat.

And this high-energy diet
has led to a baby boom.

Female langurs in this city

give birth to twice as many young
as their forest counterparts.

This mother is so well fed
that her rich milk

can support something
rarely seen in the wild.

Twins.

And all these babies can create troops

that are far larger than those
found in the forests nearby.

With less time spent looking for food,
there is more time for play.

The rewards of living in a city
can be huge.

The challenge is to find your niche.

But how to create a home in a world
that wasn't designed for wildlife?

It's far brighter, louder and busier
than anywhere in the natural world.

The continuous traffic creates barriers
to animal movement.

And in this decade,
the urban environment

is predicted to grow by nearly 30%.

What's more, to come here,

animals have to compete
with the world's top predator.

People makes the rules here.

Four billion human beings
now live in the urban environment.

It's here that animals have to contend
with the greatest change

that is happening
to the face our planet.

So why would any animal
want to come here?

New York City.

This densely built-up landscape
is as unnatural as anywhere on Earth.

And yet, this wild peregrine falcon
looks out onto an ideal habitat.

Strange as it may seem,
this vastly-altered landscape

replicates the conditions
in which peregrines evolved.

The towering buildings
have a multitude of ledges

on which falcons can nest,

and the high perches that they need
to catch the wind.

New York City has the highest density

of nesting peregrines
anywhere on the planet.

Winds striking the sides
of the skyscrapers

are deflected upwards
and can help the birds gain height.

And the great areas of concrete
roasting in the sun create thermals,

so that, with very little effort,
the birds can soar over the city.

And so many peregrines can live here,

because down at street level,
there is a lot of potential prey.

Diving from height,
the falcons can reach speeds

of over 500 kilometres an hour.

But their prey stay down low
and close to the buildings.

Too risky.

The peregrine pulls out of his stoop.

But the effort is not wasted.

The falcons need to
flush their prey into the open.

And Manhattan is surrounded by water.

Out here the odds change.

Ana' in the peregrine 's favour.

With abundant prey here all year round,

it has taken only 40 years

for these falcons
to establish themselves here.

And now, among skyscrapers,
they're more successful

than their cousins
living in the wilderness.

Mumbai, in India,
is home to over 20 million people.

And there are predators here

that, though rarely seen,
are rightly feared.

Carnivores,

lured by the prospect
of plentiful unsuspecting prey

are on the prowl.

A leopard.

Every night, under the cover of darkness
they come out to hunt.

These are big animals,

and they're looking for large prey
to satisfy their hunger.

To catch more than a glimpse of them
and reveal their hunting behaviour,

you need night-vision cameras.

Leopards have attacked
almost 200 people here

in the last 25 years.

But humans are not their usual prey.

These leopards are on the hunt
for something else.

Pigs.

These leopards prefer to hunt
the domestic animals

that people have brought to the city
in considerable numbers.

The pigs keep their family close.

The ceaseless noise of the city
plays to their advantage.

It conceals their approach.

And the leopards are using this cover
to hunt all over the city.

This is a thriving population.

In fact, the highest concentration
of leopards in the world

is right here.

It's not only the abundance of food
that attracts wild animals to cities.

They're usually several degrees warmer
than the surrounding countryside.

And here in Rome, in December,

one animal is taking full advantage
of this extra heat.

And it's leaving it's mark.

In a single winter's day,

ten tonnes of its droppings
rain down on the city.

Starlings.

In the evening, they come back
to the warmth of the city

after feeding in
the neighbouring countryside.

They must return
to their roosting trees.

But the first to do so
are at the highest risk

of being caught by birds of prey.

So, they wait for others to arrive.

There's safety in numbers.

As daylight fades, the sky fills
with a staggering one million starlings.

And then follows
one of nature's great spectaculars.

How, or indeed why, they perform
these marvellous aerobatics,

we still do not fully understand.

Eventually, en masse,
they brave the descent

and fill the branches
of their favourite trees.

On these cold winter nights,
the city's extra warmth

can mean the difference
between life and death.

A city, of course, can provide

not only shelter and abundant food,
but glamour.

These varied objects
have been carefully chosen

by a bird for their brightness
and their colour.

This great bowerbird
has spent over a decade

building this collection of
mostly man-made objects.

Out on a golf course
in Townsville, Australia,

he's putting the final touches
to his enormous bower,

that he hopes will impress
a visiting female.

He spends two hours each day
rearranging his prized objects.

"Perhaps that would look
a little better over there."

But it seems that something is missing.

Instead of going into town
to collect new objects,

he's decided to raid
his neighbour's bower.

"A clothes peg! Excellent!"

"And a shiny toy car."

It's a risky game if you get caught.

The owner is back.

There is one bower
where the risk is worth it.

A particular object has caught his eye.

He'll have to wait
for the owner to leave.

This is his chance.

A real treasure.

A scarlet heart.

"Got it. "

The stage is now set
for female visitors.

His luck may be in.

The seduction can now begin.

He's showing off his best goods.

"Perhaps a little plastic piping?

"Or maybe a bit of coloured string?"

But his guest doesn't seem to be
paying much attention.

"A fork?

"Madame?"

Nothing seems to be working.

Something is just not quite right here.

But he still has one trick
up his sleeve.

The scarlet heart.

As a final thrill,
he expands the pink crest

on the back of his head.

The sign of his adulthood.

But he's made a mistake.

This is not a female

but a young male who hasn't yet
developed that head crest.

And he's making off
with the scarlet heart.

It's not easy finding sex in the city.

Raising a family in the city
is not easy either.

It's spring time in Toronto,

and this mother raccoon has exchanged
her native treetops for rooftops.

Since giving birth two months ago,

she's kept her offspring
safe and warm inside a chimney.

Now, her young
have outgrown their nursery.

This is her first major
challenge as a mother.

The time has come to move to a new home.

She needs to get her youngster
to ground level.

But instead of an easy climb
down a tree,

she is faced with a vertical drop,

with little to cling onto.

Her baby's first glimpse
of the urban world,

from a terrifying ten metres up.

This is the last of her litter
to be brought down.

Its siblings are already

- busy exploring the area.

And they have much to learn.

This one has fallen into a back alley
and is trapped.

Mother comes to the rescue
and demonstrates what must be done.

That's the way.

Raccoons are opportunists.

And they're eager to explore.

But they'll have to learn very quickly

how to get along in this
strange new environment

so full of hazards.

Mother comes to the rescue once more.

Urban raccoons are now
demonstrably better

at problem-solving
than their country cousins.

When the feeding opportunities
are this good,

the time spent working out
how to get to it

is well worth it.

The complexity of urban life

favours the clever.

But to compete with humanity
during daylight hours,

takes more than just intelligence.

It takes nerve.

One enterprising species of monkey

has moved into the city
of Jaipur in India.

The Rhesus macaque.

But how to get a share
of all this juicy fruit?

Every morning,
the troop make the same journey

through the urban jungle,
just as human commuters do.

Sometimes, inevitably,
there are traffic jams.

Once they get to the market,
trouble begins.

Being both intelligent and brazen

is the key to beating
human beings on their home turf.

It's daylight robbery.

There are some animals
that most would consider too dangerous

to tolerate in the city.

Spotted hyenas.

They're feared throughout their range.

In the outskirts of Hara in Ethiopia,

two clans are coming face to face
to battle over a prized resource.

There are about 60 hyenas in each clan.

And they're well matched.

After three hours of
posturing back and forth,

the losers retreat

and the victors head
to claim their prize.

They have been fighting
over access to the city.

Once inside the city walls,
they head for one place.

And they know exactly how to get there.

The ancient meat market.

The scent of all these carcasses
lies heavy in the air.

This tradition goes back over 400 years.

The human butchers put out
the bones they don't need

and these hyenas deal with them.

They're the only animals that can.

No other here has such
powerful bone-crushing jaws.

And this relationship
between man and beast

has now been taken a step further.

Yousuf is calling the hyenas
to his house.

He and his forefathers,
going back five generations,

have been feeding the hyenas

by hand.

The inhabitants of this town
believe that hyenas

provide another very important service.

Eating the bad spirits
that haunt the streets.

These are wild and ferocious animals,

but once within these city walls,

they behave in a completely
different way.

Throughout the rest of Africa,
spotted hyenas are feared

because they kill livestock,
sometimes even children.

They are perhaps the most
vilified animal on our planet.

However, here in Harar,

their relationship with people
is entirely peaceful.

They have won the trust of man.

Losing its fear of humans

has enabled one animal
to spread into cities everywhere,

and in huge numbers.

Pigeons are by far
the most successful urban bird.

Here, in Albi, in the south of France,

the pigeons come to the river to bathe.

They need to preen
their flight feathers,

clean off the city dust,

and cool themselves down.

But death lies in wait.

A predator that has taken advantage

of the very thing that has led
to the pigeon's success...

Their lack of fear.

As the pigeons bathe,
oil from their plumage flows downstream,

and is detected.

A monstrous Wels catfish.

Introduced here just 40 years ago,
they have proliferated.

Virtually exterminated
the local fish stocks...

And they've now developed a taste
for pigeon.

Their eyesight is poor,

so they use their barbels to sense
the movements of their victims.

This is a radical new hunting strategy

for what is normally
a bottom-dwelling fish.

After a thousand years
of living in this city,

pigeons are now having to learn
to avoid a fish.

Our cities are always changing.

Sometimes very swiftly.

And animals must cope with the changes,

or disappear.

One of the greatest changes
in recent times

has come from a single invention
made less than 140 years ago.

Electric light.

It has become more and more powerful,

filling our streets with light.

It's everywhere in the city.

It even goes underground.

The difference between day and night
is becoming less and less perceptible.

And that has a profound effect
on the activities of wildlife.

In the wilderness,
light triggers all kinds of behaviour.

On the night of the full moon,

hundreds of tiny
hawksbill turtle hatchlings

emerge from the safety of their nest
deep in the sand.

Their instinct is to reach the sea
as quickly as possible.

And their guide is the light
of the full moon reflected on the water.

But this young hatchling is confused.

It's going in the wrong direction.

Bright light is coming from the land.

And all these hatchlings
are travelling up the beach towards it.

Predators are ready to take advantage.

Crabs now make their burrows
directly beneath the beach lights

and wait for their prey to come to them.

Even if a hatchling escapes,

they're still in peril.

The lights become
more and more bewildering.

80% of all hatchlings on this beach are now disorientated by the lights of the town. Roads bring many to their end. Hundreds get trapped in storm drains every night. Exhausted by the effort of travelling such a distance on land, this hatchling's chances of surviving the night are slim. This turtle is one of the countless species that have been unable to adapt to the change brought about by the urban environment. Only a small number of animals have managed to find ways of living alongside us. And every ten years, an area the size of Britain disappears under a jungle of concrete. But it doesn't have to be like this. Could it not be possible to build cities more in harmony with nature? How, and whether we decide to invite the wildlife back, is up to us. This tree is rising nearly 50 storeys. It's one of almost 800 being planted to create a vertical forest in Milan. This number of living trees would normally fill two hectares of woodland, but here, they occupy one-tenth of that area. Greening the walls and roofs of our buildings could create a rich and extensive habitat, if we wanted it to do so. There is one city where that idea is being applied on a major scale. Singapore. Two million trees have been planted here in the last 45 years. This city is now richer in species than any other in the world. And this practice extends to all parts of the city. The waterways have been cleaned up, and smooth-coated otters are coming back. But perhaps the most spectacular example of city greening is this grove of super trees. These 50-metre high metal structures are now full of life. Creepers have been planted to grow over the outermost branches. Is this a vision of our cities of the future? The potential to see animals thriving within our cities is achievable across the globe. More than half of us now live in an urban environment. Whether we choose to create a home for others too is up to us.

Crocodiles hail from the great age of reptiles well over 70 million years ago. Since then, the world has changed dramatically around them, but amazingly, they have changed little. They are the only great reptile predator to have outlived the dinosaurs. Ancient they may be, but 70 million years on, they are still the most successful freshwater predator. Most of the waterways in the tropics these days have their own species of crocodile. How come that they've been so successful for so long? Well, it seems that their design, when it first appeared, was already very advanced, and it's kept them successful ever since. This film reveals the nature of that success. Crocodiles may have scored an early evolutionary bull's eye, but there's much more to their staying power than brute strength. Only now, by exploring their complete world—above and below water, by day and night—can we fully appreciate just how sophisticated they are. Crocodiles can float or sink at will, finely tuning their buoyancy. They can control their buoyancy like a submarine. The liver is squeezed back to make more room for the expanded lungs. A crocodile can stay submerged for up to three hours. While submerged, a protective membrane closes over their eyes, like swimming goggles. Crocodiles are cold-blooded. They rely on the temperature of the sun and water to heat themselves up or to cool down. They are sluggish, but when they are warm enough, crocodiles are capable of breathtaking speed. They're the most dangerous freshwater predator on the planet. It's a status gained thanks to adaptations so sophisticated that ancient crocodile survived when their close relatives, the mighty dinosaurs, perished. It's a design that has allowed them to spread around the tropical world. This extended family includes alligators of temperate waterways, gharials of the Indian subcontinent, and caiman of tropical South America. They've even invaded the sea. Special glands in the mouth allow crocodiles to tolerate salt water long enough to reach the next river. This is how they spread along the coasts. But only a few species can migrate across oceans. The real specialists, the saltwater crocodiles, are affectionately known as "salties." They've been seen more than 600 miles from land, encrusted with barnacles, as they search for new island homes. This pioneering spirit and their unique character has made them a universal threat. Crocodiles deserve their tough reputation, but they aren't just solitary killers. In the calm of the Florida swamps, we can begin to see them in a new light. They are reptiles with social skills, and American alligators are particularly vocal. During the breeding season, an expressive chorus of bellows, grunts, and hisses rises from their dense swamps. Having settled himself into a suitable lagoon, a territorial male sets about fending off rivals. Such a perfect breeding pond is hot property. Other males put in an unwelcome bid for occupancy. The resident male only shows a bit of muscle if the rival fails to get the message. He's made his point, and he can now focus on finding a mate. Vibrations within his muscle walls send sound waves rippling out into the swamp, powerful enough to make the water dance. Part of his roar radiates at such low frequency that human ears can't hear it. But these subsonic calls have astounding penetration, travelling four times faster, and further, under the water. Only with special low frequency recordings can we appreciate what the female alligator hears. When she hears his rumbling invitation, she wastes no time, and the low frequency calls guide her through the murk and vegetation. Female alligators move freely from the territory of one male into that of another's. Even though the call may come from the remotest part of the swamp, she soon finds him. Then, things get intimate. After lengthy calling, the physical part of the courtship begins. Alligators may mate with several partners during the short summer breeding season. Crocodiles are extremely sensitive to touch. Their armor-plated toughness would appear to be only skin-deep. Such complicated language and behavior is exceptional among today's reptiles, but crocodiles might provide a tantalizing rear window on the social life of their ancient relatives, the dinosaurs. Nile crocodiles are the most fraternal crocs of all. Once a year, they hang out together, soaking up the sun at traditional mating places. Compared to Florida's noisy alligators, African Nile crocodiles are fairly quiet. These are far from being lazy afternoons. But the group is very organized, and individuals keep a careful eye on the movements of others within it. A healthy, 15-foot adult male attracts the attention of smaller females on the lookout for a fit partner. Up to ten females spend much of their time in the water soliciting him. They bare their throats as a gesture of appeasement. He'll mate with them all in turn during the breeding season. The male also uses body signals and shows off with noisy water displays. But these postures don't always keep rival males waiting in the wings. The top male flaunts to his female audience as the challenger tries to get in on the act. The rival's change of mind comes too late. Lives are rarely lost, but toes, limbs, and even tails can sometimes get ripped off. A victorious fountain of water re-asserts the top male's authority. The biggest males are usually the most successful when it comes to attracting mates. The females can also be influenced by individual temperaments. It's they who often take the lead, by rubbing themselves along the length of his body. At first, he snubs both of them, but the rubbing releases a pungent oil from glands under their jaws. Both sexes are highly sensitive to this crocodile perfume, and the male answers with his own musky message. The scent in the water is particularly potent before mating. The male will eventually court and couple with all the females in the group. But the subtleties of crocodile relationships remain submerged in mystery. Several weeks later, the females are ready to make their nests. Even when basking, adults rarely move far from water. So, it's ironic that the first and most critical part of the crocodilian life is spent on land. Crocodile babies are born encased in eggs, but they must still breathe air. It's essential that this mother lays her clutch well beyond the high water mark. The eggs will be so at risk—from drowning, from predators, and from temperature fluctuations—that she relies on exactly the same nest position year after year. These time-honored sites are a measure of the experienced care that crocodile mothers provide. Once the excavation is complete, she lays her eggs in a trance-like state. The hole will become an incubator. Crocodile eggs will only develop if they remain between a steamy 80 and 94 degrees. So, her choice of site is critical. Nest chambers from equatorial African plains to high Himalayan river valleys all remain within this temperature range. But no one knows how crocodile mothers get it right. Once the nest is sealed, the mothers keep vigil for 90 days. Temperature determines the sex of the developing eggs. A half-degree difference between the top and bottom of the next could markedly affect the ratio of males to females. No one knows yet just how disruptive global climate changes will be in terms of the sex ratio of hatchlings in the future. Right now, these youngsters face more immediate, local threats. The noise and smell coming from the nest could soon attract the attention of hungry raiders. Fortunately, there mother has been waiting nearby, and is the first to hear the muffled newborn cries. Once she digs them out, they must reach the relative security of water as quickly as possible. The babies could probably find their own way, but they're only safe if they all stick together, so their mother transports them to water herself in her mouth. The skin of her lower jaw stretches into a hanging cradle in which she can carry fifteen or so at a time. It's a snug fit—once you're in. Her 40 or so eggs hatch simultaneously, so she'll have to make several trips. The clamorings of the waiting hatchlings constantly remind her to return to the nest, and ensure that no one misses the last bus. She releases them into a nursery pool, where they must make the most of her tender loving care. They have only a few weeks under her watchful eye. Their rate of growth is affected by temperature. Over a lifetime under a tropical sun, they may grow 4,000 times bigger than this. While they're so tiny, they call to each other and to her—conversations that continue into adulthood. The 18 different sounds they'll use represent a vocabulary more typical of mammals than of reptiles. These calls can be of life-saving importance, particularly if one loses contact with the group. This hatchling's adventurous spirit is putting him in great danger, from predatory birds and monitor lizards. The rest of the family is now nearly 50 feet away. But just as their calls fade, the lost hatchling's survival instincts kick in. He utters a loud call of distress. It's answered by his siblings. The stray baby calls again. The other hatchlings reply. Their constant calls guide him back to the security of the family. Vocal contact ensured this youngster's survival. Other threats demand spirited action by their mother. One of the biggest risks is from other crocodiles. The mother successfully defends her own brood, but it's a grim reminder that crocodiles will eat just about anything. Like the adults, the young aren't fussy about food. And, like adults, they are masters of the stealthy hunting technique that all crocodiles are born with, keeping eyes, ears and nose at surface level. These shoreline snacks may be wildebeest or zebra in years to come. Growing hatchlings must eat 5% of their own weight every day. Frogs, grasshoppers, spiders, anything small enough goes. They rely on communal living to survive this tender age, but competition between the youngsters is intense. Many will be picked off by predators. Floods and droughts also take their toll. Only 2% of the hatchlings will make it to adulthood. In Venezuela, the babies of South American caiman also face tough odds. It's the dry season. Only a few pools remain. Even the fish are out of water. The dry season is five months long, but in some years, it's more severe than usual. Unexpectedly, animals can be left high, if not exactly dry. Eventually, some of these watercourses will dry up completely, leaving many caiman exposed and dehydrated. Temporary skin relief is provided by this ultimate of mud masks. Cooling water is at a premium. The remaining pools are becoming over-crowded. At such pressing times, the adults usually tolerate each other. However, babies could be eaten by them, so this is no place for a mother to raise her young. Fortunately, her babies can expect complete maternal attention during this five-month period of danger. The shrinking marsh forces their mother to make a drastic move. If she gets it wrong, the whole family will perish. Night-time cameras reveal that they will make a run for it, under the cover of dark. Their escape will be risky, for it's made over land. Mother leads the way. It's a while before the babies have the courage to join her. Calls of reassurance, and maybe her musky smell, encourage the hatchlings out of the water. She follows good instincts. Night-time temperatures are less dangerous to tiny cold-blooded bodies, and there are fewer threats about. But this is a long march that must be concluded by day-break. Their mother's acute sense of smell brings them to their watery destination, with less than an hour to spare until dawn. There's plenty of water here for her babies to survive the rest of the dry season. But there's no room for their mother. Another female has already had the same idea, and adults won't share the pool. To avoid a fight, the newly arrived mother moves on, leaving her family behind. They'll be safer in the swamp than with her. Others have done the same thing. The foster mother's creche has now swollen to more than 100 babies. Only some are hers. This mother carries her burden lightly. Crocodiles are more social than all other reptiles and grow up in company. As hunting adults, this may prepare them for dedicated teamwork—especially if there's a rare dish on the menu. Migrating zebras cross the Mara River in Kenya only a few times each year, travelling between traditional grazing grounds. Resident Nile crocodiles cannot afford to miss these fleeting chances. So, they cooperate. From different places under the riverbanks, they spend days waiting and watching the nervous herds. Only when the zebra have committed themselves to a departure point do the crocodiles take up their final positions. The current drags the zebra downstream, so five or six crocodiles cover the crossing from different angles. It's hard work for crocodiles too, but they can submerge, taking advantage of deeper, slower currents to move closer. Their approach is stealthy, measured and tactical, as if moving in on a chosen victim. The current is flowing in this zebra's favor. It buffets the crocodiles out of position and they can't get a grip. The zebra's wide rump gives it a big advantage. Adult zebras also have a vicious kick, which could break a crocodile's jaw. That might mean starvation, so crocodiles are also taking risks. A lot of effort results in little success for the crocodiles—but only until smaller, more vulnerable animals enter the water. At any time, the zebras can be ambushed by frightening power and lightening speed. The baby zebra faces several waves of attack. Crocodiles work alone, or in groups, depending on the size of the prey. This time, they were rewarded. Farther south, in Zambia, the parched Luangwa Valley is the scene of some remarkable behavior. In the dry season, it has one of the highest concentrations of crocodiles in the world. Hundreds crowd together, forced to share what little water remains. Even the hippos can't find water deep enough to wet their backs. In the heat of the day, crocodiles save their energy. There is little to do and, it seems, little to eat. But even in these extreme conditions, crocodiles excel at making the most of their circumstances. Far from being dependent on large mammals such as wildebeest or zebra, crocodiles have extraordinarily adaptable diets. We've not known this until now, because we've never seen them hunting at night. What crocodiles do at night has remained a mystery because they will only move around naturally in total darkness. So, only with the use of invisible infrared light can we see their nocturnal habits for the first time. In the Luangwa River shallows, a Nile crocodile hunts for less glamorous prey. It's stalking fish. Over the year, crocodiles fatten up on fish and mollusks, rather than mammals. Mammals come and go. But the muddy river bottom is always a good place to stir up snails, for instance. The crocodile is a flexible feeder in its methods, too. It uses its armor-plated body as sinuously as a length of fishing net to corral fish towards the shore. Midnight feasting is not uncommon at this time of year. But even the fish are running out. By day, the temperatures soar. The only ripples now are those shimmering in the scorching air. For the crocs, things appear to be getting desperate. Many animals have to resort to the scavenging habits of vultures. Even hippos, normally grazers, are forced to supplement their meager rations with the grassy stomach contents of a dead buffalo. But crocodiles still thrive on the edge. And, once again, infrared cameras allow their night habits to be discreetly filmed. Vultures have to wait until daybreak, but other scavengers and hunters are out in force. Hyenas are doing particularly well at the expense of others. Some crocs just couldn't find enough to live on. Others, though, hang onto life. But they look danger in the eye every night. Only when the dry season becomes desperate, are these two great hunters of land and water likely to come face to face. The crocodile is too hungry to be intimidated by a lion, and the smell of food wafting towards the river on the night air is just too strong. But it walks into an unlikely dinner party. A hungry hippo is formidable company. Even the lions know that. Unsure at first of its welcome, the crocodile soon takes its place at this most unusual mutually tolerant gathering. For the lions, there's no such thing as eating in peace. No sooner is the hippo out of the way than the crocodile actively takes on the whole pride. The lions, though, have had enough of the intrusion. Though lions have been known to kill crocodiles, this croc won't take the hint. There's not a lot the lions can do, especially when the smell of their supper coaxes other crocodiles out of the water. Crocodiles have thick skins. The lions are forced to defend their meal by moving to a different table. They just leave nothing but scraps behind. The reptiles have stronger stomachs than the mammals. Lions can only cope with smaller tissues. Crocodile digestive juices are so acidic that they can break down skin, bone, and horn. There's no such thing as crocodile left-overs. Their exceptional sense of smell enables them quickly to capitalize on the demise of others. And at the end of the dry season, the smell of death is everywhere. Sickness, starvation, and injury take many victims. One of this hippo's group has died. The crocodiles have good reason to be wary. A provoked adult hippo could easily inflict a mortal wound. So, they wait for it to go before closing in on the carcass. Food, any food, is hard to find. Crocodiles from up to four miles away recognize the whiff of opportunity. Each crocodile patiently waits for the chance to feed. The reason for this patient approach? Crocodiles have a powerful grip and sharp teeth, but their jaws don't move sideways. They can't chew. So, they have to eat large animals together. One or two crocodiles effectively brace the carcass in the jaws, while others wrench off smaller pieces of flesh by spinning their bodies around. The largest male usually initiates the communal meal. How the rest of the crocodiles organize themselves to feed, no one knows. It can take 24 hours to satisfy every diner. Too readily, perhaps, we have cast crocodiles as ruthless predators, feared them, misunderstood them, attacked and exploited them. But they are great survivors from an ancient line that goes back more than 70 million years. And perhaps, in millions of years to come, crocodiles will live on, successful still, looking and behaving much the same as they do today—one of the world's great survivors.
In the world of birds, nearly all males rely on their looks to attract a mate. A lyrebird, like so many, uses his feathers. The Count Raggi's bird of paradise has gauzy plumes spouting from beneath his wings. Bare patches of brilliantly colored skin can also prove quite arresting. Many males flaunt their spectacular plumage in dramatic dances, as the Riflebird does. But nature does not endow every male bird with such spectacular good looks.

In the art of finding a mate, one family of birds has evolved a much more extraordinary technique, the Bowerbirds. Instead of showing off their bodies, they use inanimate objects that they collect and arrange in special ways. Many of them put their treasures on display in front of special structures, bowers.

Bowers come in several different basic shapes. Their treasures vary, too. These days, some birds even collect objects made by human beings.

One species, the Tooth Billed Bowerbird, collects particular kinds of leaves and displays them in the simplest of ways, on a specially cleared patch of the forest floor.

It's no accident that all of these leaves are pale-side uppermost. The bird clearly prefers them that way and I can easily prove that by turning one of them the other way up. That's better. Leaves of the wrong kind, and other bits and pieces, have to be removed to keep the display looking at its best. But will his collection impress the next passing female?

Australia is home to eight different species of Bowerbird. This one, the Tooth Billed, is continuing to arrange his collection of upturned leaves in a way he hopes will impress any female that comes by. No other male animal woos his mates by displaying inanimate objects in this way, except, of course, us.

He's also using music to help him set the mood.

[Bird calls]

A rival with a bower nearby listens and answers. One mimics the other.

[Bird calls]

A female has arrived.

[Bird calls]

Down he comes to his display ground. And there, he hides behind a tree trunk. He is only allowing her little glimpses, as though he were trying to make her curious as to where this strange clicking sound of his is coming from.

She seems interested. He steps up his display with a little fancy footwork and a gargling call.

[Bird calls]

It's a somewhat alarming way of demonstrating his charms, but it must presumably be the sort of thing that turns on a female. But not this time. So he goes back to singing.

The Tooth Billed's treasures are the most modest of any in the Bowerbird family. But nonetheless, they are the key to his breeding success.

But the effect can be ruined by careless uncomprehending neighbors. This Brush Turkey is looking for seeds and grubs and worms by overturning the leaves and pays no regard to the Bowerbird's careful arrangements.

But there is another threat lurking in the forest. This is not the owner of the bower. This is a neighbor, a rival, and he's not dropping by for a friendly visit. He's here to steal the leaves from this display to use them for his own. Thievery, as it turns out, is a way of life among the Bowerbirds.

Farther to the south, in a more arid region of Australia, there lives another member of the Bowerbird family with tastes that are markedly different. Instead of leaves, these are the treasures this male uses to attract a mate.

And behind them is something extra, a strange two-walled construction of twigs. This is not a nest; it's an art gallery, or perhaps a treasury. And these are the jewels that it's been built to show off, bones, snail shells, pebbles. And they have one thing in common. They're all white because the artist that built this has a passion for white. And if I retreat and have a little patience, he may well appear.

This is him, the Western Bowerbird.

His bower is the key to his success and it dominates his life. If it's sufficiently impressive, then female after female, after inspecting it, will mate with him. Each will then go away and rear her family entirely by herself while he stays here, doing what he can to improve his bower's appearance, re-arranging and adding to the treasures it contains and hoping for yet another mating.

This is a female who's touring in the neighborhood, seeing what's around. How does this bower compare with others that she's seen? He watches closely to see what her reactions are. Maybe he can add a little spice with a dance. He nods to show that pink tuft on his head. Off they go together, and another male arrives.

He has not come to steal. He's here to destroy. He works fast. The owner may be back any minute and if he's caught, there could be trouble. Hours of work destroyed in a few minutes. If a female comes by before the owner of this bower can rebuild it, the vandal with an undamaged, even if inferior bower nearby will have the advantage.

Thievery and vandalism are, sadly, the inevitable consequences of rivalry among any creatures that place great value on inanimate material things.

The only other country in the world where Bowerbirds exist is in the gigantic thousand-mile-long island of New Guinea, just across the narrow arm of the sea to the north. Its thick, rain-drenched forests were once continuous with those in tropical Australia. So it's not surprising to find members of the family up here too.

Travel in New Guinea is not easy. It rains almost every day, so everything in the forest is permanently wet. And over great areas there are no roads, only thin tracks. So the only way to get around is on your own two feet. But it's a journey worth making for here there are species that build the most extraordinary bowers, including one that uses the Tooth Billed's technique of decorating the ground but drapes the branches above as well.

In this forest, where every tree is hung with moss, you might walk straight past this bower; unless, that is, you noticed that there were blue berries pounced on this branch and then behind you, dried orchid stems hung round the sapling like tinsel on a Christmas tree. And they go 12 feet up and extend 20 feet beyond me. And then, as you walk into the heart of this path, there is really conclusive evidence of what it is. Here, lots and lots of wing cases of beetles, and most extraordinary and conclusive of all, three of the amazing head plumes of the King Saxony Bird of Paradise. They could never have fallen into this position naturally. The Bowerbird must have deliberately put them there.

And this is the proprietor, Archibald's Bowerbird, until very recently the least known member of the whole family. That yellow crest shows that this is the male. He's picked up a beetle's wing cover. Clearly he thinks it would look better in a slightly different position.

This bird doesn't have that yellow crest. It must be a visiting female. Her arrival is the cue for him to display. He seems to be playing hide and seek, like the male Tooth Billed. It's a way of drawing her attention to the wonders he's laid out on the ground. And when the female comes down to inspect them, he chases her in a ritualized way, back and forth across the floor of the bower.

But whether he is successful or not, who knows? No ornithologist has ever seen the mating of Archibald's Bowerbird.

Walking through this forest, you have to keep your eyes skinned. If you stop for any length of time, leeches are likely to start looping across the ground toward you. And you also ought to keep a lookout for berries balanced on branches as a sign of a nearby Archibald's bower. But there's one kind of bower here that is so extraordinary that you can't fail to spot it.

It's easy to imagine how baffled early European travelers must have been when they found something like this in the depths of the forest. It's based around the stem of a tree fern. These aren't tree fern roots. They are separate twigs, each individually placed. On the ends of many of them, there are pendants made of caterpillar droppings. This is a rim around the corridor made of impacted moss. And on the top of it little black objects. They're actually fungus, but rare fungus. It's very hard to find these if you look in the forest here.

And here is the owner, McGregors Bowerbird.

Fungus, clearly, in any well-appointed properly tended bower should never be found in the runway round the base of the maypole. Keeping the bower smart requires such continuous attention that the male has little time for other things. So when he does manage to get away to forage, he brings back as much food as he can carry and stores it nearby. That way he won't have to leave the bower when he wants a snack.

His reproductive success will depend on his having, in the eyes of the females, the most impressive bower around. So one can never have too many caterpillar droppings hanging on one's maypole. And suspending them is not easy.

What next?

Another twig, that could look good on the very top of the maypole.

We know that the females tour all the bowers in the neighborhood, assessing them and presumably making a choice between them. And there must be fifteen or twenty within a mile of where I'm sitting now. So on what basis do they choose? Well, they aren't judging as to whether the bird is going to be a good father in the sense of helping in the nest, because these male Bowerbirds have no part in either building the nest or feeding the young. So the females, presumably, are judging on the way that this bower has been built, how it's been decorated and how he dances within it. And that means that the females must have some kind of aesthetic sense, artistic sense. And the interesting thing is that in recent years, European sculptors have also thought that there is great aesthetic power in constructions like this. 

So, if this is a work of art, as it certainly is in the opinion of many critics, why is this not? It's certainly constructed with great care, and when you watch a male at work, it's quite clear that he's giving great consideration to the placing every one of its decorations. There may be over five hundred of them distributed around the maypole. Sometimes he will change the placing of a new acquisition several times before he is satisfied it can be seen to its best effect.

Time for a refreshment. He takes a snack from his larder in the nearby saplings.

And now he backs up the effect of his sculpture with an intimate murmuring song. A female has appeared.

[Bird calls]

He uses the standard family technique of trying to arouse her curiosity by hiding.

[Bird calls]

She flies off to one side and he dodges to the other, to keep out of her sight behind his maypole. But she's going to look elsewhere. Had she been more impressed, she would have flown down into the runaway, and then he would have launched into his full display. That is a very rare site indeed, for the females are extremely choosy.

But the owner of this bower has struck lucky. The final revelation, the full display of the crest, that until now he has kept hidden, though he still now only gives her glimpses of it. Less than one in ten male Bowerbirds manages to persuade a female to reach this stage and then copulate with him in the forest nearby. But those few successful males will mate with the majority of the females. All bower builders try to be polygamists.

Five of the eighteen species in the family build their bowers on the maypole plan and each does so in its own particular way. In the Australian rainforest there's another.

This is a rather more complex bower. It is similar in many ways to the maypole but instead of having one maypole, it has two. Here's one around this sapling and here, not quite so big, is another. Every single twig has been brought in and on this kind of bower you nearly always find that they have been glued together with a kind of fungus. And between the two maypoles there is a horizontal branch and it's there that the jewels are placed by the birds. There are lots of these translucent seedpods but mostly it's this yellow lichen. And if I put this on there I don't think he'll like it. That might bring him in and I will go and wait over there to see if we are in luck.

[Bird calls]

The forest is full of sound.

[Bird calls]

That is him. That is his scolding call. The trouble with this forest it is full of mosquitoes. I daren't flap my hands too much. That's the Whip bird. It is very typical in sound to this Queensland rainforest. That is the Whip bird again. And he's coming down to the bower.

There's the Bowerbird. That's one of his approach posts. He often perches here. Here he comes.

[Bird calls]

No, he certainly doesn't like that bit of lichen where I put it.

Back again. This time he has brought a Jasmine flower, one of his favorite decorations. There must be a female nearby. He is playing peek-a-boo like the MacGregors, only this time he is not using a sapling but a very substantial tree trunk.

That's her. She's come down to the bower.

That's him again. Here he comes.

But he is behaving very strangely. He is not rearranging his decorations. He is throwing them away. This must be a neighbor, a rival, intent on damaging this bower, in order to make his, nearby, seem better.

[Bird calls]

Sometimes you find one of these twin maypole saddle-backed kind of bowers quite high up in the trees, like this one.

This is its creator. He belongs to just the same species. He's a golden Bowerbird. But why should he build in such different positions? It may well be that all the bowers of the golden birds start this way, and they're used for so long, generation after generation, that the vine on which they're built increases in length so much that eventually it nears the ground. And it's these bowers that we usually find.

Just as some building sites in the city are more valuable than others, so it is with the sites of bowers in a forest.

[Bird calls]

The longer a bower has been established, the more valuable its site becomes. And that is for two reasons. First of all, all the females in the neighborhood would know where it is and where to come to look for a mate. Secondly, the owner of the bower has been depositing his droppings in the neighborhood, very necessarily containing the seeds of the fruits on which he feeds. So, if the site has been occupied for a long time, there will be an unusual concentration of food drops there.

This particular site has been occupied for at least twenty-two years. Two years ago disaster struck. A tree fell and smashed the bower. But did the male abandon his property? No, he did not. It was far too valuable. He simply moved a few yards and built another construction. And one, if anything, that is even more spectacular than the earlier one.

And he is back within seconds to keep it so.

The mountains of New Guinea, away to the north, are much higher and much wetter than those of Northern Queensland. And it's on their flanks and in the most leech-ridden parts of these forests that you have to go if you want to see the almost unbelievable complexity to which a maypole bower can be brought.

And this the work of the master builder among Bowerbirds. I am in the Vogelkop in the far-western tip of New Guinea and this is the bower of the Vogelkop Bowerbird. And what an astonishment it is, surely one of the wonders of the natural world. The bower has been completely roofed over, thatched with these stems of orchids. It has been built around the base of a sapling that has a stout pillar right in the middle and it's got two smaller pillars on the side to support it. The hole of the treasury is five or six yards across and what treasures it contains...or what variety of treasures it contains. On the far side, there are the black stems of tree ferns. Here is the lawn, neatly planted with moss and on it the shiny wing covers are beetles. There are orange fruit. There are these glowing, orange, dead leaves. These are the acorns of the oak trees, the tropical oaks which are common around here. Behind me there are black fruits.

This individual nearby, however, has completely different tastes. His bower is just as large and as splendidly thatched but he's taken advantage of this bush coming into bloom and has decided to try to impress the touring females with floral decorations. Like anything else in a bower, flowers, to create the best affect, have to be arranged with great care.

Only a few hundred yards away from that, a third bower, and yet another quite different display. This bird is experimenting with brown—brown fungus and brown leaves.

Yet another short walk and yet another bower, and another quite different collection: black berries, orange fruit and orange blossoms from a mountain rhododendron.

The next bower, the same elements, but this male has arranged them differently and given them a special bold individuality by placing right in the center a huge black mushroom.

As well as the ground displays of the Toothed Bill and the maypoles of the Golden and McGregor Bowerbirds, there's yet another basic design for a bower, an avenue. And to see that at its best, you have to go back to Australia.

You might think that this is just a rather untidy nest that some reckless bird has put on the ground, but in fact it is not a nest at all. It is another bower. It has two sides to it. It's an avenue bower and at that end of it is a cleared patch and just one or two treasures, nothing spectacular, just a few little green leaves. That, you may say, is not much of a temptation to display to a female but you wait until you see the bird that made it.

The Regent Bowerbird has the most spectacular plumage of the entire family. His female once again is very plain. It seems that there's a rule among some Bowerbirds, the more elaborate your bower, the less vivid your plumage. And conversely, as in this case, the simpler the bower, the more colorful the male. And since the male Regent has such brilliant plumage, he understandably attracts the females initially by perching in the topmost sunlit branches where he can be best seen.

Having got her attention, he must now lead her down. His bower may not be much but she, nonetheless, has to have a sight of it before she will accept him. And she follows.

What will she make of it?

Perhaps because his collection is not as huge as some others, he picks up particular gems to show them to her individually, just in case she's missed their finer points. He also makes sure she realizes how splendid he is personally by repeatedly showing her the back of his neck. It seems to be a family habit, shared with those other species that have crests on their napes.

She certainly seems interested.

And what about this for a real treasure? The molted skin of a cicada. And that may well have done the trick. They go off together into the bushes.

In the forests a little farther north, another member of the family builds a rather more substantial avenue, taller walls, more treasures. It's the creation of the Satin Bowerbird. He's certainly very handsome, but he's not quite as splendidly plumaged as the black and yellow Regent bird.

So perhaps it's not surprising, in view of what seems to be the rule followed by some Bowerbirds, that he builds a bower that is very much more substantial and impressive than that of the Regent. He gives the walls great solidity by firmly interweaving the sticks. Now he adds the decorations. He has a liking for blue objects, but he's also fond of green, and regularly garlands the bower with leaves. But he does something else. He paints it.

He chews up leaves and smears the pulp over the inside walls. One can only assume that the female Satin has a particular liking for interior decoration. When it comes to jewels, blue is undoubtedly his favorite—objects like this berry. Presumably, since Satin females clearly find their males' blue feathers attractive, this is an obvious way of adding to his appeal.

But his tastes are wide. He likes a touch of green, curiosities like cicada skins, oddly shaped bones and skulls and skeletonized leaves. Carrying a jewel about is a sign that he knows a female is near. She has landed just behind him.

Here she is. Walking into the avenue is a strong hint that she is interested.

Good afternoon, madam. We have a particularly impressive seed that might interest you.

Away she goes and so does he, leaving his collection unguarded. And that's reckless, bearing in mind the family's tendency to thievery. Here comes his neighbor. Robbery is certainly widespread among Bowerbirds. But not all visitors to a bower are necessarily thieves.

This, in front of me, is the work of the Great Bowerbird, which builds the biggest of all of these avenue type bowers. But it has not been produced by a single male. That is a juvenile, a young lad as it were, and he is one of a group of about half a dozen young immature males, that's apprentices, who are learning their skills by working together on this bower.

The techniques of wall construction seem to come just as easily to a Bowerbird as nest building does to other birds. But home decoration is another thing and these youngsters seem to have their own ideas. They have built a bower here in Townsville, in the municipal cemetery.

Cemeteries offer special possibilities to an imaginative Bowerbird. Marble chippings, and lots of them, that could be a disadvantage. The thing that impresses a girl about diamonds is that they are rare and, therefore, expensive. You couldn't say that about marble chippings here. Still, they could work.

You can vary them a bit—snail shells, a few fragments of beer bottles, a hair band—but marble chips are the favorite. If you can't impress with their rarity, then quantity could be the thing to go for. But shifting marble chips in large numbers is thirsty business.

Over on the other side of town, there are other opportunities for a bird with adventurous tastes. There's an army barracks. Camouflaged green is used by the modern army for all sorts of things. And the bird that owns this bower clearly thinks it is just the color with which to dazzle a female because it's assembled a whole collection of green objects here. There are foot powder packets, bits of flecks,but mostly water bottle tops in green.

But is he just choosing green because that is what happens to be around? Let's find out. He's back within seconds. I carelessly shifted that bottle. That is the first thing to put right. And then...what's that? That certainly won't do. You might think that there would be quite enough military paraphernalia here for everyone. On the other hand, stealing from your neighbor not only improves your collection but damages his.

The owner is back and there must be a female around for he's starting his display. His only bright feathers are in that small pink crest on the back of his neck.

That's her.

This is the moment to add to his attractions by showing her his crest, but at the same time drawing her attention to one of his choicest possessions. And while he goes through his display rituals, so do his human neighbors.

A few miles away there's a school. There are lots of things here for an avant-garde Bowerbird, who wants to impress the opposite sex by showing what imaginative and innovative tastes he has.

And indeed there is a bower, a big spectacular one right in the school's grounds. It's been built by another collective of young males practicing their art. All kinds of brightly colored, highly desirable objects are being handed around during outdoor lessons. But there are limits as to how brave even a Bowerbird can be.

Until, that is, it's time for the class to go back indoors.

The boys move in. There are all kinds of possibilities here. Some test the birds' lifting strength to the limit. So the Bowerbirds have come to town, and like anyone else coming into the big city for the first time, they're discovering all kinds of new visual excitements that they never encountered in their old homes in the country.

How many can you carry at one time?

Who knows what these extraordinary bird artists will do with such new materials at their disposal in years to come?

No other male animal seeks to impress his mate not with his strength, his beauty or his physical skill but with the wealth that he has accumulated through industry, thievery or artistic inspiration, except of course one, us. But in both cases it does seem to work.

For over a century, scientists have searched for the origin of birds and flight, and the evidence keeps pointing to the same improbable conclusion. Somehow, flying birds evolved from Earthbound dinosaurs more than a hundred million years ago. Exactly how it happened is still one of the great mysteries in the history of life. And the solution may be in this box.

Mark Norell and Mick Ellison are from the American Museum of Natural History in New York, but they spend much of their time in China, hunting dinosaurs.

They're on their way to Liaoning Province in the northeastern corner of China, a region that's produced some of the most spectacular fossils ever seen. It's an overnight train ride to the kind of place paleontologists dream about.

Today, it's a harsh and often barren landscape. One hundred thirty million years ago, during the age of dinosaurs, it was a forest teeming with life, some familiar, and some not. It was also a place where volcanic eruptions created a virtual Pompeii. Now the trees are gone, but remnants of ancient life remain in the petrified layers of volcanic ash.

Norell has spent much of the past 10 years immersed in the history recorded in these slabs of rock. They open like the pages of a book, sometimes with exquisitely preserved fossils inside. These are more than snapshots of the distant past, they're high resolution records of life in a temperate forest during the Cretaceous period. They're especially valuable for the number and variety of small animals they add to the fossil record: the fish, frogs, turtles and reptiles that lived in and around the freshwater lakes.

The first turned up more than a decade ago with what looked like a feathery fringe along its back. Then came others with feather impressions that were unmistakable. These weren't giants like T. rex. Some were no bigger than crows. But their skeletons showed they belonged to well-known dinosaur clans.

They were runners, not fliers. Their arms were too short to function as wings. They were just what most scientists predicted the ancestors of birds would look like before they evolved flight: small, carnivorous dinosaurs with feathers.

The dinosaur-bird connection first came to light in the1860s, when quarrymen in Germany discovered a fossil called Archaeopteryx. It had the feathered wings of a bird, but the teeth and long bony tail of a reptilian ancestor. Some thought the ancestor might be a dinosaur.

But the idea didn't catch on until a century later, when paleontologist John Ostrom led an expedition to Montana and discovered a new kind of dinosaur. It was a lightly-built meat-eater with a killing claw on each foot. They called it Deinonychus, "Terrible Claw."

A few years later, Ostrom was studying Archaeopteryx, when it dawned on him that the skeleton looked like a miniature version of Deinonychus. He found dozens of similarities, enough to convince almost everyone that dinosaurs like Deinonychus were not only the ancestors of birds, they were very much like birds themselves.

The new-look dinosaurs made their widescreen debut as the raptor villains of Jurassic Park. Playing the role of cunning predators, they forever dispelled the old image of dinosaurs as dim-witted, cold-blooded reptiles.

Long ago, voyagers in the Indian Ocean chanced upon a large, floating object of mysterious origin. Its suggestive feminine shape launched many a sailor's fantasy. Some believed this was the forbidden fruit that tempted Adam, and somewhere nearby must be the original Garden of Eden.

Eventually, the exotic seed was discovered on a gigantic female palm tree known as the "coco de mer." Like Eve, she too must have an Adam, the male coco de mer palm with its giant pollinating appendage. This tree is a vestige from the vanished world of the dinosaurs; and it shares the forest with other Jurassic-aged giants, dwarfs and many other bizarre forms of life.

This lost world is hidden in a cluster of islands called the "Seychelles." Tiny specs of land a thousand miles from anywhere, the Seychelles lie in the middle of the Indian Ocean between Africa and India. These remote islands conceal an astonishing array of life and are a refuge for strange creatures found nowhere else on Earth. How this living paradise came to be is an extraordinary tale.

In the middle of the Indian Ocean lies the Seychelles, a remote group of islands that pose a baffling puzzle.

Deep in the misty uplands of one island hides a tiny creature that should not be there. The pygmy piping frog is one of the smallest vertebrates on earth. The adult frog is not much larger than an ant. Unlike most amphibians, this frog lays its eggs on dry land. Enclosed in these watery egg cases, the babies go through the entire tadpole stage before they hatch.

On a small rocky island with few fresh water pools this is an advantage. After three to four weeks the bubble bursts and a fully formed frog emerges in miniature.

But frogs rarely colonize ocean islands. These amphibians are delicate. The salt, sun and heat of an accidental ocean voyage would surely kill them. So how did they get here?

The frogs, and the other curious creatures that inhabit these secluded islands, have long been a mystery. The tiger chameleon's closest relatives are found in Africa. Disguised as the foliage, the leaf insect is almost invisible. This insect's nearest ancestors come from Asia. Both are masters of camouflage, perfectly adapted to their environment.

The chameleon's disguise and time-tested strategies ensure a meal is never far out of reach. Its eyes rotate independently, allowing it to see in two directions without having to move its head. Poised, at just the right moment its spring-loaded tongue shoots out and reels in its unwitting victim.

The presence of an African chameleon here, on a distant outpost in the Indian Ocean, is as remarkable as the presence of this exotic plant. The pitcher plant's closest cousins are in Malaysia.

To survive on rocky outcrops with little soil and few nutrients, the pitcher plant has evolved an ingenious method to supplement its diet. The plant secretes a sugary nectar that lures an unsuspecting fly. It proves to be a fateful slip. Slowly drowning in the lethal digestive juices, this fly has no chance of escape.

These mosquito larvae are somehow immune to the plant's toxic water. It's a perfect nursery—safe, with a steady supply of food. The larvae pay their way by helping the host plant to digest its catch.

A hungry skink is on the prowl, looking to take advantage of the pitcher plant and its pantry of ready-made insect meals.

So how could a plant whose closest relatives are in the Orient and creatures with distant cousins in Africa and Asia all end up here together on a remote group of islands, a thousand miles from the nearest mainland?

The search for an answer begins with the rock. These time-eroded formations are granite, a type of bedrock usually found on continents. But here, far from any continent, are the Seychelles, the only islands in the middle of an ocean made of solid granite.

The secret of their origin stretches far back in time. Two hundred million years ago the earth was divided into two great landmasses, Laurasia and Gondwana. The southern super-continent Gondwana included present-day Africa and India. Then during the middle of the Jurassic period, Gondwana began to split up. The sea filled a rift between Africa and India to form the early Indian Ocean. Then India broke from Madagascar and began to drift northward.

About 65 million years ago, fragments of the ancient landmass were torn off, leaving behind the central granite islands of the Seychelles.

These peaks are the highest points on a now submerged remnant of ancient continent. On the largest of these granite islands are surviving relics from the lost world of Gondwana.

This forest is a living Jurassic Park of palms. The trees are direct descendants from an age when the dinosaurs roamed and all life grew much bigger. In this age-old forest one palm tree reigns supreme.

The extraordinary coco de mer holds the record for the largest leaf and the biggest seed in the entire plant kingdom. So rare, early sailors thought they came from a tree growing beneath the ocean. The mysterious nuts came to be called coco de mer or "coconut of the sea."

Since only the hollow rotten nuts float, these palms never spread to new shores. One of the coco de mer's last remaining strongholds is a large grove on this granite island. Here, the trees can grow up to a hundred feet tall in the sheltered quiet of this ancient valley.

The male coco de mer tree boasts an enormous catkin, which can grow to more than five feet in length. This male reproductive organ is so large it supports its own mini-ecosystem. The ripe pollen-laden flowers are a magnet for visitors of all kinds. The giant white slug's only home is on these catkins. The day gecko also spends most of its life here, feasting on the rich supply of pollen. Microscopic hairs on its feet help it cling to almost any surface. Topside or bottom, no area of the catkin is beyond reach.

No one knows whether it is one of these creatures or the wind that carries pollen to the female coco de mer. An old Seychelles legend says the trees consummate their union by swaying together on stormy nights. However it occurs, it is the start of something big.

Once the female tree is pollinated, it takes seven years for the nuts to mature. A single nut can weigh in at 40 pounds. Too large to be carried away by a bird and too heavy to float, a fertile coco de mer seed never left this Eden until humans came.

Now park rangers must tightly control the harvest of the nuts to safeguard a future for these ancient palms.

Stripping away the outer husk reveals the curiously shaped seed inside. The double lobes of the coconut account for its suggestive appearance. When sold, these so-called "love nuts" will help pay for the preservation of this unique nature reserve.

Today tourism in the Seychelles is carefully managed to preserve the islands' precious natural heritage. The highlight of any trip is a visit to the smaller, undeveloped granite islands, which are a haven for rare and unusual species.

Separated for generations from their mainland ancestors, many birds have evolved into new forms found only on these islands. One bird, the magpie robin, seems to have adapted its behavior to take advantage of the tourist activity. The visitors' footsteps stir up leaf litter, exposing the insects hiding underneath. The robin tags along behind, cleaning up as it goes.

But whose trail did the robin follow before the people arrived? This hulking creature—the giant tortoise. Weighing more than 600 pounds, the lumbering tortoise plows up the soil, exposing beetles, worms and other treats for the foraging robin.

The Seychelles magpie robin is one of the rarest birds in the world. Fewer than 100 individuals now remain. A tame ground feeder, this bird had few predators until the arrival of humans—and the cats and rats that came with them. The tortoise and the robin struggle to maintain a fragile hold on their island home.

Another critically endangered bird is the black paradise flycatcher. The male shakes his long tail feathers and calls in an attempt to attract a mate, but the female flycatcher is busy with other things. She is looking for insects and collecting spiders' webs. The spider's web silk is a strong nest-building material. She uses the sticky silk to help bind the nest into a neat cup.

The Seychelles blue pigeon is another island original. It feeds voraciously on fruit, which it swallows whole.

The tourists are only the latest in a long list of new arrivals. Outsiders have always come to these shores, joining the original descendants of Gondwana. Aerial migrants fly thousands of miles to congregate in large seabird colonies, while below the land is crawling with lizards.

Granite islands like this one have as many as one hundred thousand skinks, some say the highest density of lizards anywhere in the world.

These ground-dwelling reptiles can't fly and they don't swim but they can hitch a ride. Rafting skinks travel on all kinds of flotsam. A log or a tangled mat of vegetation makes a seaworthy craft.

Now ashore in a new land, the first task for a hungry skink is to find a meal. The most tempting delicacies are beyond reach until a coconut delivers a spider hors d'oeuvre. But skinks would never have thrived if they had to depend on such an unreliable menu. A nesting colony with hundreds of thousands of seabirds is a waiting banquet. The skinks would be much scarcer without the seabird colonies.

Noddy terns are another successful island colonist. They spend most of their lives on the wing, but at breeding time they must to return to land. Their sea legs are ill-suited for a narrow perch, and courtship gets off to a wobbly start. The broad branches of the pisonia tree are prime real estate for nesting, and the pisonia's big, floppy leaves are prized for home-building. On a small rocky island with few trees, these leaves are precious and often stolen.

In any case, seafaring noddies don't find nest construction very easy. A combination of shoddy nests and general clumsiness on land leads to accidents. For skinks, this is truly manna from heaven. Even when eggs make it through hatching, the chicks are ill-equipped for life in the trees. Many fall out of the nest before they can fly. And the skinks await eagerly any mishaps.

For the noddies that do survive, their hardships are not over yet. Twice a year the pisonia tree exacts a harsh toll for its services. In return for providing a home and nesting materials, the tree enlists the noddies as seed carriers. The seeds ripen with sticky hooks that attach themselves to passersby. The dangling branches are traps for unwary birds. When caught, some struggle out to sea. Now they become reluctant couriers, helping the pisonia tree to spread its seed to new islands.

Crippled by the load, other noddies are grounded for good. Feathers entangled, they fight for survival. In a final twist of fate the bird carcasses decompose, fertilizing the thin soil in which the trees grow.

Other victims, like this sooty tern, instinctively head for the sea in a desperate attempt to clean themselves. Waterlogged and unable to fly, this unlucky tern's fate is sealed. The casualties attract a nearby army of ghost crabs that patrol the beach. This solitary crab avoids the feeding frenzy and sneaks away with the catch, hiding it in a burrow.

The vast expanse of ocean is no barrier for some intrepid travelers. The day gecko is one such hardy voyager. Occasionally, geckos lay their eggs in driftwood. These makeshift rafts float out to sea, carrying the next generation of geckos into the unknown.

Beneath the waves lurks an underwater giant—the largest fish in the world—the rare whale shark. Up to forty feet long, this leviathan feeds on the tiniest of marine life, plankton. It sucks in large mouthfuls of seawater filtering the plankton out through a sieving system in its gills.

Closer to shore, the hawksbill turtle forages for food in the reef. It breaks apart the coral looking for sponges, and crushes the larger pieces with its hawk-like beak.

Parrotfish also come armed with a bony beak. These large fish must feed constantly during the day. They graze directly on the reef itself. Chipping off fragments of the coral, they feed on the nutritious algae, which covers the reef. These bite marks are the parrotfish's signature. The digested remains come out as a trail of fine white sand.

This coral sand turns out to be a vital ingredient in building new islands around the Seychelles. Sand and coral debris are washed against the reef by storms and tides over thousands of years. Eventually, the sand accumulates on top of the reef to form a brand new island. These small, sandy coral islands barely rise above sea level and lie in stark contrast to the ancient granite fragments of Gondwana. These younger islands begin devoid of life. Everything on them today is a relatively recent arrival.

The durable, waterproof shell of the gecko's eggs protects the precious cargo through the rigors of an ocean journey. Once hatched, the baby doesn't need to feed straight away. The young gecko has a store of yolk inside its stomach, which will keep it going until it reaches the safety of a palm tree. The geckos are tiny and vulnerable, but luckily sandy coral islands have few threatening predators. True masters of island colonization, it would be no surprise to find a gecko on every palm on every tropical island.

The seafaring geckos are joined on these coral islands by countless airborne migrants. More than a million sooty terns land on these beaches at the start of the breeding season. They stay only long enough find a mate and raise their young. It's a risky proposition since they lay their eggs on open ground within easy reach of predators. Fortunately, each pair of sooty terns has just one chick to feed and protect. The birds band together to form a communal nursery.

While there is safety in numbers, the defenders on the fringes of the colony need to be vigilant. A hungry egret stalks the perimeter looking for a wayward chick. The sooty parent jumps to the defense of its chick, despite the intruder's size. One attack is thwarted, but the egret is a persistent foe. Luckily, few egrets stray this far out of the way.

A common sight on most tropical islands, fairy terns are another champion colonizer. These blue-beaked birds are nicknamed "love terns." Unlike the other terns here, these affectionate birds breed year round. They live in the trees as devoted couples rather than congregating in large colonies on the shore. And they often mate for life.

Brooding is a reproductive high wire act. Fairy terns don't bother with nest building. They lay their eggs in almost any nook, no matter how precarious. But when the trade winds start to blow, their balancing act turns into a life and death struggle. The parent has no choice but to hang on.

Strong forces are constantly at work, reshaping and transforming the natural order. Beneath the waves, volcanic eruptions give birth to new mountains, which rise up from the sea floor. They provide a foundation upon which coral reefs grow. Over the centuries, the living reefs build up, layer upon coral layer, and eventually form new islands, which encircle the now extinct volcano. In the center, a shallow lagoon is left behind. This unique process of island formation creates a type of island known as an atoll, and the Seychelles is home to the world's most spectacular.

When Arab traders first came across this coral atoll they called it "Aldabra"—"the Green." Some say that the shallow turquoise waters of the central lagoon reflect in the clouds overhead and create a luminescent glow that can be seen from miles away. Aldabra is the largest raised coral atoll, 20 miles long with a central lagoon big enough to be called a sea. Twice a day the tide rushes in through narrow channels, flooding the lagoon with a fresh supply of seawater. What was once living coral is now fossilized, bleached and battered rock that the tides have sculpted into strange shapes. These low-lying islands have been submerged and exposed many times over their long history.

Among the colonizers of this jagged coral skeleton are some unexpected creatures. This lumbering giant is a rare survivor from the reign of the dinosaurs. Aldabra is home to the largest population of giant tortoises in the world. There are more than 100,000. That's seven times as many as on the Galapagos Islands, the only other surviving population.

Once widespread across the islands of the Indian Ocean, the first giant tortoise to arrive on Aldabra was probably swept off a beach hundreds of miles away. Cold-blooded and naturally buoyant, it can survive at sea for weeks at a time without food or fresh water. It's possible that just one castaway could have been enough to populate the island. Females can store sperm for up to nine months. So a single, fertilized female could have started a dynasty all by herself.

Crab plovers migrate in the hundreds to feed in the lagoon during their wintertime visit to Aldabra.

Over many generations, some birds have become prisoners of the island, like this flightless Aldabran rail. Its ancestors must have flown here once, but with no predators and little competition, the rail has lost the power of flight. Grounded now it can't leave.

Occasionally, the cautious tortoise indulges in a moment of high adventure. One false step and it's over. An overturned tortoise is a dead tortoise.

Lacking teeth, the tortoise swallows its food without chewing.

Tortoise romance can be a tricky business. The underside of the male tortoise's shell has a hollowed out shape to ease the perilous ascent into position. Despite all their hard work, only one in fifty couplings succeed.

When a young hatchling finally emerges, it's in constant danger of being eaten by predators or squashed by a parent. Growing from this...into this...can take a further quarter of a century. But if all goes well, a tortoise may reach as much as 140 years of age.

The short grasses here, known as "tortoise turf," have adapted to the constant grazing. With seeds near the bottom rather than the top of the blade, the grasses have managed to survive.

Tortoises feed during the cool hours of the early morning. By noon, it is tortoise rush hour and they move into high gear. Unable to regulate their own body temperatures, these large reptiles must head for the shade. There is a mid-day jam for cool spots under the trees. With the scorching sun, overheating is their greatest danger.

Apart from finding enough shade and fresh water, tortoises have little to worry about. Finally protected from man, the adults have no predators to disturb their rest. Sleeping with their necks extended is a good way to cool down. As they doze off, a burst of activity begins around them.

Hermit crabs take the opportunity to collect a fresh consignment of tortoise dung. Here nothing goes to waste.

The abbots gecko joins the noon gathering. It hopes to catch one of the insects swarming nearby. Unable to blink, the gecko uses its tongue to clean off its eyes.

Out in the midday sun, it's low tide in the central lagoon. Many come to feed in Aldabra's rich waters that teem with life, including the black-tipped reef shark. The shallow sea makes hunting easy.

Soon the tide turns and the lagoon fills again.

The clean-up crews on Aldabra are the many varieties of crabs that inhabit the island. These robber crabs are scavengers on the lookout for tortoise eggs and hatchlings. The female land crab carries a clutch of eggs on her belly that will soon hatch into larvae. She heads for the ocean to release them in time. Nothing distracts the mother crab from her task.

As night falls, the beach begins to crawl with activity. Robber crabs come in two shades, red or blue, and they can grow up to three feet across.

This giant hermit crab has given up hiding in shells. Besides, there are none large enough for it to inhabit. They are also known as coconut crabs after their favorite food. Powerful claws help them to crack open the hard outer shell of the coconut. Coconut envy can lead to all-out combat.

Undeterred, the female land crab ignores this tournament of jousting giants. She is on a more important assignment. The larvae are now hatching. They need the ocean to move on to their next stage of life. But, for the mother, this can be a hazardous duty. She releases the eggs by lowering one side of her shell and jiggling her body in the waves. This life-giving dance can be risky. Some mother crabs drown in the surf.

The female tortoise lays her eggs at night to keep cool. The digging goes slowly, one leg at a time. It can take up to eight hours of patient work to prepare her nest. The egg chamber is now ready and it is time to lay the eggs. A single female may lay a dozen or more.

It is the start of a new generation that will differ little from its ancestors going back 200 million years. Sheltered by a simple island existence, evolution has left these animals behind. Here, the tortoise has been protected from the march of time.

The islands of the Seychelles remain a world apart, where relics from Gondwana survive in safe seclusion, and where species, separated from their ancestors for generations, grow into new and exotic forms. These islands remain fragile and priceless sanctuaries. It is not the original Garden of Eden, but the Seychelles is a rare living paradise on Earth.

Enchanting, almost magical in appearance, the seahorse is long inspired myth and legend. They pulled the chariot of the Greek god Poseidon. And in China, they're considered charms of love. They have the majestic head of a dragon and a grasping tail of a monkey. Their skin, stretched over a knobby skeleton resembles the armor of an insect, and free roving eyes circle like those of the chameleon. Yet seahorses are simply a type of fish. But unlike other fish, or most animals on earth, they possess one truly magical trait. In seahorses, it's the male who gets pregnant and gives birth. The mysteries of the seahorse kingdom hold an irresistible allure. Led by biologist, Amanda Vincent, this team is the first to track seahorse life in the wild. After rising at 4 a.m., they pull on scuba gear still wet from the day before and head into the cold and murky water of Sydney Harbor, Australia. Right off-shore in the shallows of this suburban bay lies a hidden realm, a thriving seahorse colony Amanda Vincent found in 1989. She has by now spent thousands of hours swimming with these remarkable creatures.

Camouflage is the best means of protection for these sedentary fish. Some have the ability to change color to match their surroundings, whether muted sea grass or brightly colored corral. Within minutes, a solid purple seahorse develops speckles when showered by the bubbles of an aquarium tank. If swept out into wide open seas, seahorses will seek shelter in any available cover. This floating mat of weeds a hundred miles off the Florida coast offers many hiding places. But predators also lurk here, so seahorses take a further step to protect themselves. This Sargassum fish may be puzzled. His potential prey has not only changed color, but has also grown spikes that help him blend into his floating home. But seahorses generally stay close to shore. In the shallows of most coastal waters throughout the world, from NOVA Scotia and as far south as Tasmania, some type of seahorse can be found, if you look carefully. These unusually upright fish are designed for stability rather than speed. A dorsal fin that flickers up to thirty-five times a second helps precision movement through the grassy maze. But they spend most time anchored to whatever hold is handy: sea grass, sponge or soft corral. They reach out to catch small crustaceans floating by. Seahorses have neither teeth nor stomachs, yet manage to digest thousands of tiny shrimp each day. They patiently watch as their prey come near, shift slightly to position themselves, and strike with a powerful suck. But the most intriguing thing about seahorses is their social life. And only in the wild, spending time in their domain, can biologists watch it unfold. Within a grassy meadow of Sidney Harbor lies a complex social world, one that Amanda Vincent has come to know well. Every year, about a hundred seahorses swim here from deeper waters to spend their seven month breeding season. Each is tagged with a numbered necklace. This allows Amanda's team to recognize every animal and observe the curious relationship between the sexes. In this world, the male is the homebody. He lays claim to a small patch of seabed, often clinging to the same blade of grass day in and day out. The one social interlude in an otherwise solitary day is when his partner arrives for her morning visit. It happens like clockwork, within a few hours of each dawn. And Amanda is there to take note. A female roams widely, passing through the territories of many males, but she has eyes only for her partner. She knows what he looks like, and knows where he lives. After their initial greeting, each seahorse pair perform a gentle and familiar dance. The couple entwine tails and promenade through the sea grass together. This daily ritual cements the strong bond between them. They make the most devoted of partners, remaining in pairs and scorning all others throughout the breeding season and maybe beyond.

This is quite extraordinary in the animal world. Usually, we find that males are cheating madly and have a few other partners on the side, or females are off seeking more matings. And these seahorse, they're strictly faithful to one partner. And the way we've looked at this is by tracking individuals through the sea grass bed.

 In the animal kingdom, parenthood is a loosely defined term. Most underwater animals, like this sea urchin, invest little in each offspring. Their reproductive strategy relies on numbers rather than nurturing. This male releases clouds of sperm into the open water, while a female sea urchin spawns another cloud with thousands of eggs. Some fish do protect developing young from the dangers of the open water, but the means may strike us as unconventional. African cichlids incubate their offspring in their mouths. After sucking up eggs she's laid, the female cichlid entices the male in this circle dance. She may mistake spots on his fin for more eggs. When he releases sperm, she takes some into her mouth. After ten days of brooding, the young will hatch. Here it's the female who endures this bizarre form of labor. But it's not unusual for male fish to do the mothering, like this one building a nest for eggs he'll fertilize. In over half of the fish families known to care for their young, it's the male who invests the effort. This father is no exception. A close relative of the seahorse, pipefish provide clues to how male pregnancy may have evolved. Pipefish vary greatly in size and color, but on close inspection, all resemble seahorses that have been stretched and straightened out. A number of pipefish species form faithful pairs, and those that do engage in their own daily dance. The other close relatives of seahorses are the equally magical sea dragons. These leafy sea dragons from Southern Australia float well disguised among the weeds. In both sea dragons and pipefish, it's the male who carries the fertilized eggs to development. The eggs may be covered under a flap of skin or exposed on the belly of the fish. It's a form of male pregnancy, but the seahorse goes a step further, protecting the fertilized eggs in a womb-like pouch. Male seahorses may seem maternal, but they produce sperm, and this, by definition, makes them male. But do they show the macho behavior that's the norm among males in the animal kingdom? Do they fight over females? Or are the females the aggressors?

Seahorses come from dozens of countries, from Belize and Brazil to Vietnam and Malaysia. In a single year, over a hundred thousand were fished in Florida alone where trawling boats are equipped to harvest a catch in quantity. This fisherman makes his living primarily from shrimp, but he keeps an eye out for other goods caught in his net. As it skims over the ocean floor, the trawl may trap or kill any number of animals that make their home in the sea grass. When shrimp are separated from the other sea life, seahorses are often part of the mix, including pregnant males. Even if they are kept alive, their young will not survive. Most of the seahorses found will be sold. A few injured are swept back with the debris. In other parts of the world, the fishermen may be less well-equipped, but they're even more determined to catch their quarry. Seahorse fishing is critical to the livelihoods of thousands in the Philippines. In the village of Handumon, Nestor Botero is one of the fisherman who hunts them. Six nights a week he heads out to a reef armed with a bucket and a lantern. The seahorses emerge from crevices in the corral during the night. Even though it's dark, and Nestor is diving as deep as thirty feet on one breath of air, he is still able to find them. Once spotted, a seahorse is easy to catch. Rather than fleeing, a threatened animal will grasp its perch all the more tightly, relying on camouflage and body armor for protection. But all to no avail when the predator is an expert human fisherman. Most of the seahorses caught around the world end up in Hong Kong.

Within this remote African forest lives a great ape. It's one of our closest living relatives, yet to many, it's a complete stranger. It's the bonobo.

Until quite recently, bonobos were thought to be just smaller versions of chimpanzees. They do resemble chimps, but they're a completely different species.

Where chimpanzees fight and murder, bonobos are peacemakers. And unlike chimps, it's not the bonobo males, but the females, who have the power. Much of bonobo life revolves around one activity, sex. It may even be the reason why they're so peaceful. These animals could give us new insights into our own background, in particular, where we get our gentler side.

But just as we started learning about them, their homeland, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, plunged into civil strife. Beginning in 1994, the fighting raged for almost a decade. These animals were caught in the crossfire and hunted for meat by a starving population.

The tributaries of the great Congo River lead to the only place on Earth that's home to an amazing ape, the bonobo. This has always been a difficult place to travel. Even now, the journey takes many days. As the river snakes into the heart of Africa, it's easy to feel you're going back in time.

These are some of the oldest and richest rainforests in the world. The water doesn't stop at the bank; swamp forest stretches back from the river's edge for over half a mile. It's a tough place to get around, unless you live up in the canopy.

Animals like colobus monkeys can be found throughout this region. But it's only within a single bend of the Congo River that bonobos are found. This part of the forest is like a time capsule; bonobos may have existed here in much the same way for 2,000,000 years.

These deeply intelligent apes seem very relaxed. They take afternoon naps, are highly social, and develop lifelong friendships. Mothers nurse their babies for about five years. Such an extended childhood is rare in the animal kingdom, but for young bonobos, it provides a crucial time to learn about the world.

It's hardly surprising these creatures strike a chord. We humans share a common ancestor with both bonobos and chimpanzees. Between five and seven million years ago, our ancestors branched off from the apes. Humans still share over 98 percent of our DNA with both bonobos and chimps, who split into separate species themselves about 2,000,000 years ago.

But only bonobos continued to live just in these lush forests where they first evolved. Because their home in the jungle is so remote, scientists weren't able to study them in the wild until the mid-1970s.

In the rainforests of the Congo, two groups of researchers set up study camps in Lomako and Wamba. Even then, the Congo and many of its neighboring countries, like Rwanda and Angola, were politically unstable. This is a dangerous place to study animals.

Hidden away in this distant jungle, these endangered apes are still largely unknown to the rest of the world. Unlocking their secrets has proved slow and arduous.

Bonobos have also been overlooked because they have been studied far less than their better-known cousins, the chimpanzees. Chimps are easier to study because they live across Africa in greater numbers. They also tend to steal the limelight, in part because of their excitable and violent nature.

Chimp society is defined by power. Male chimps spend their lives making and breaking alliances. At their most aggressive, they band together, crossing into adjoining territories to hunt down and kill neighboring groups of chimps. A conflict can be bloody and brutal. But when different bonobo troops meet, the outcome is often not war but peace.

But at mealtime, it's unmistakable: sisterhood is power. Although males and females search for food together, females decide how it is shared out.

A fallen bolingo fruit is a favorite, but it's the females who get to feed first. Male chimps wouldn't tolerate it, but male bonobos have to wait their turn.

The females often share food with each other. It's a crucial way of strengthening their bonds. The males might want to muscle in, but if the females stand united, the males remain under their collective thumb.

Individually, a male bonobo is stronger than a female, but shows of strength remain just that. Mostly they're ignored. Male bonobos are also kept in check because they don't rely on each other for support. They lack the powerful alliances that give male chimps the upper hand. A male bonobo remains by his mother's side for much of his life.

While bonobos have a generally peaceful temperament, they do have disputes and moments of aggression. But they avoid violence through a very natural method—though it may be shocking to us—sex on a very frequent basis. Most animals, even chimps, have only a few days each month when females are sexually active. But bonobo females have sex through much of their cycle, even when there's no chance of getting pregnant.

Like humans, bonobo sex isn't just about having babies.

What is different is that sex has spilled over into most areas of bonobo life.

ut these brief sexual contacts have an enormous impact on the overall calmness of bonobo life. Intimacy makes it hard to stay angry. Bonobo disputes might begin aggressively, but sex can smooth tensions, even in mid-charge.

The gentle nature of bonobo sex contrasts sharply with that of chimps, and it may have evolved as a protective measure. In chimp society, where sex is mainly for reproduction, males compete so aggressively to breed that they've been known to kill each other's offspring. Once a mother loses a nursing baby, she becomes a potential mate.

But bonobos aren't known to commit infanticide, perhaps because fatherhood is nearly impossible to determine. Frequent sex with multiple partners is the norm for both males and females.

So female chimps spend much of their time alone, searching for food and vulnerable to male aggression.

But the bonobos environment provides easier access to food, allowing females to eat together and bond, which gives them power. Bonobos, with their matriarchies, their cooperation and their tolerance towards different communities, appear to turn long-cherished ideas about apes upside down.

Bonobos are clever primates. They have proven themselves capable of change. It's long been known that bonobos, like chimps, are highly intelligent apes. 

This is South Luangwa National Park, in Zambia, a lush riverine valley full of life. Leopards thrive here, but they are masters of concealment, and if you do catch a glimpse of an adult during the day, it's generally not doing very much at all.

Adults are generally solitary, much more secretive than lions or cheetah, and rarely hunt during the day.

Because of their stealth, leopards—not surprisingly—are the least known of all Africa's big cats. Much of their behavior has been hidden from us by the veil of darkness.

But now, using the state-of-the-art night vision equipment, we will be able to witness the behavior of a female and her cub as well as this mature male, as shadows lengthen and the sun begins to set.

We enter the real world of the leopard as the male leaves his refuge to begin his night patrol. Among these leopards of Zambia we will see activity rarely, if ever, observed before.

We will also travel southwards, to Namibia, as part of a three-year effort to penetrate the night-time secrets of the cat that walks on its own.

As the daylight fades, most animals try to find somewhere safe to hide away from night-hunters like the male. Tension increases as the day dies. Baboons seek refuge in the tallest of trees.

As our eyesight fails, we turn to the unique video camera, that can record full color pictures in very low light.

Here is the female, whom we can recognize by a scar on her side. She is fifteen, which is quite old for a leopard. Like all leopards, she hunts on her own. She locates her prey—an impala. But bright moonlight interferes. The impala is in a mixed herd of puku and impala, all of whom are able to spot her movements from hundreds of yards away.

The transformation comes as the night turns. Now, in the pitch dark, a second camera, which is sensitive to infra-red frequencies, allows us to still see clearly.

Now both antelope and leopard have much more limited vision, though it's uncertain just how much they can see. Hunter and hunted rely on their other senses, like hearing. The leopard can't make one, single, sound. It's pitch dark, and remember, only we can see her. The antelope use every sense to try and detect any danger that might be out there. The leopard strains not the heard—even the rustle of a leaf would give the alarm.

She must get nearer to strike, but when she's as close of this, even the sound of her breathing could give her away. Perhaps it was her scent that betrayed her. But the puku and impala still don't know exactly where she is, until she moves off, and gives the game away. Her tail signals that she's given up, even though the antelope can barely see her.

For the first time, we were able to see clearly the true tension of the hunt at night. Traveling to Namibia, the leopard's secretes are unravelled differently.

Here, scientist Philip Stander has joined the Ju/Hoan bushmen to piece together the nocturnal behavior of the leopards in these semi-arid lands. There is very little game in this vast landscape.

Radio tracking from the air, Philip is able to locate different leopards in the study. He pinpoints the last location for the bushmen. As in Zambia, the leopards are so shy and secretive in the day that they're hardly ever seen. But for the Ju/Hoan this is no problem. They don't need to see leopards to discover their secrets. All they require are footprints. They interpret the faintest of prints to reconstruct the leopards actions. They find that a young antelope has been killed by a male leopard. His tracks reveal he was as close as twelve feet from the calf before he pounced.

As hunters themselves, their knowledge of nature is unmatched; their interpretations are almost one hundred percent accurate. Along with Philip, they have recorded in meticulous detail over a hundred night-time hunts. Their observations reveal that leopards often have to stalk as much as ninety feet before they can get close enough to spring.

The team has confirmed that the solitary leopard is indeed a superlative hunter.

In Zambia's river valley, the leopards have a choice of a wider variety of prey. In their treetop refuge, the boons are hard to catch, but sometimes the male makes the attempt. This time, he doesn't have to be quiet. Instead, whilst the moon is out, he employs what we call "psychological warfare." The noise of his advance creates great alarm because baboons have poor night vision. He takes advantage of this by deliberately terrorizing the troop, trying to force one of them up a branch of no return.

If the moon stays out, there might be just enough light for the baboons to keep one step ahead. They can't see much but they can hear that, somewhere close, there's a killer in their midst. But when the moon disappears, the baboons are very much at a disadvantage.

Finally, the leopard's chase has paid off. Once again, darkness was the key to his success, creating an opening which he was quick to exploit.

Because they are adaptable and opportunistic, leopards are the most successful of Africa's big cats alive today.

The baboons, with their poor night-vision, are inevitably vulnerable to predators with better eyesight.

Long ago, other primates were also almost helpless when faced with cats that could see in the dark. In southern Africa, caves containing thousands of bones, some of which were brought in by carnivores over centuries, tell the story.

Farther down in one cave, remains nearly two million years old show that for our earliest ancestors, before the priceless discovery of fire, passing the night in a cave entrance was very hazardous indeed.

Our distant ancestor, an adult australopithecus robustus, and a youngster whose skull shows puncture marks made by the teeth of a leopard.

With fire and the development of more sophisticated weapons, later hominids were no longer helpless victims in the dark. They had become top predators.

Young Kui and the other Ju/Haan bushmen in Namibia follow a traditional lifestyle which has been handed down to them through the generations.

It takes time and skill to make fire, but it does help to keep predators at bay during the long African nights.

For thousands of years, the bushmen have been hunters and gatherers. Today, their ability to find, track and hunt animals is phenomenal. After all, their lives depend upon it.

They use the larva of a beetle as a deadly poison, and prepare for the hunt with ritual. Here, what we call magic and supernatural powers are a way of life. Going into trance helps them pass into the spirit world where animals become people, and people animals.

The leopard was worshipped for its prowess as a hunger, but even so, the full extent of its skills was hidden by the black of night.

In Zambia, the infra-red camera continues to reveal more about the leopard's life at night. The female is trying to catch puku fawns. In the absence of moonlight, she can't find them by sight, so she's using her nose.

Young, inexperienced puku would be easy prey, but the fawns tuck themselves away at a distance from the herd, and their bodies are almost scentless.

She has found one and, once again, has to close the gap without rustling a single blade of grass.

In the dead of night, the fawn can't see nearly as well as our camera. The fawn has grown tense; she can see something, but not enough to be sure. In addition, there's an unfamiliar scent in the air. The fawn strains her ears for a confirmation of danger, as the wind changes direction.

Luck just wasn't on the leopard's side. Once again, it was her scent that betrayed her. The stalk demanded so much concentration and control that she's quite exhausted. She also has other urgent business: scent marking.

There's so much prey here that the leopards can have small home ranges which overlap. Occasionally, they even scavenge from one another's kill.

Generally, though, each tries to avoid the other, and marking along regular pathways helps, since the scent contains vital information, telling other leopards which individual was around, and when. Scent glans on her feet leave pungent signs of her presence. Tonight, she wants to attract a male, because she's coming into season.

She calls, using the ground as a sounding board so her message travels as far as possible. A male nearby responds. As they approach one another, the female becomes very cautious. The male seems belligerent. In this dangerous liaison, she must react quickly. The male is much bigger and much stronger than she is, so she has to be careful that her presence does not irritate him.

After many hours, she considers it safe for her to come closer. They mate frequently for three nights and days. This is the only involvement that males have in family life.

Back in Zambia, a young female has been trapped. She is one of eighteen leopards in Philip Sander's study. She was radio-collared as a cub, and now her collar needs to be loosened.

The Ju/Hoan have adapted their traditional bows and arrows to fire tranquilizing darts. The bushmen rarely see leopards in the flesh, and they fall into silence.

Although the collar looks big, it's quite lightweight and won't impede her movements.

They've discovered that leopards here have huge home ranges. One male regularly traveled an area of over four hundred square miles—a necessity in this arid Namibian environment where prey is very dispersed.

In such vast areas, Philip's radio tracking makes it possible to find the animals in the study, though not to see them very often. But the bushmen will follow every detail of their lives from their tracks. They're releasing this leopard in good condition, but having just become independent, she's at a most critical stage.

The majority of young leopards, when they start to fend for themselves, die of hunger.

The bushmen are now tracking a female with a half-grown cub which they believe is still dependent on her for food.

The find the remains of a genet. By carefully analyzing the carcass, they're surprised to discover that it was the cub that made the kill.

They know that this is the first time the cub has made its own kill, a sign that she will soon be independent. But the study averages show that she will continue to rely on her mother for a few more months yet.

Philip and the bushmen are constantly adding to the data, confirming aspects of leopard behavior that had only been guessed at before. They will leave the carcass for the cub, as they know she will return here, in a few hours, to finish off her feast.

Back in Zambia, our female is with her cub. Since he's only nine-months-old, he's still got a few more months of security with his mother. The cub is the only survivor from her last liter of two.

The scar on her flank is easy to see. It may be the result of a baboon bite, five years ago, which has never completely healed, but it doesn't seem to cause her any problems.

She has to catch much more food than normal now, not only to feed her cub but also to keep herself in top condition. This necessity leads her to hunt in the day, but she usually waits for the security of nightfall before she brings the cub to her kill.

She has eaten a portion of the impala during the day, but still it weighs nearly as much as she does. Old for a leopard, she's still strong enough to haul her kill up, out of the reach of others.

But the young are foolish, and he's wasted all her hard work. He still has time to learn from his mother, who, with fifteen years of experience, is an expert in leopard survival tactics. The findings from Philip's study in Namibia show that the main reason leopards are as solitary and secretive as they are is that it benefits them not to draw attention to their kills. Leopards are relatively small cats, and in most of Africa there are other larger, more gregarious carnivores, and terrifyingly expert scavengers.

Not far away from our female leopard, hyenas and crocodiles wrestle over the remains of a buffalo.

The moon has disappeared, and the hungry male is on the prowl. He has several advantages on his side. He knows every inch of the ground, and he's learned exactly where the impala like to spend the night. Most importantly, there's no moonlight to betray him. The leopard makes the kill.

The big male impala is too heavy for him to haul up a tree. Instead, he feeds quickly, getting a meal at the same time as reducing the weight of the carcass. It's a race against time, because the alarm calls are alerting others in the neighborhood.

Every night, hyenas haunt the leopards' favorite hunting grounds. There are so many leopards that the hyenas have learned tro react quickly to any alarm calls. If they're fast, they stand a good chance of scavenging a relatively easy meal.

When he's on the ground with his kill, the male is at his most vulnerable. He's nowhere near as powerful as the hyena, and a fight to save his prize would risk his life. However, the male, like all leopards, is good at waiting. Even a small snack is worth having.

Leopards have other serious competitors, as the team in Namibia discover. The group goes into investigate because, from the air, Philip has been monitoring a signal which shows one of their leopards hasn't moved for five days. There's the remains of the leopard's kill, with an unusual mixture of tracks. There are prints from leopard, antelope, hyena, and lion. Then, old Kui finds the remains of a female leopard. Sadly, it's the mother of the adolescent female whose radio collar was changed earlier.

From the tracks, the bushmen discover that two lionesses were attracted by the scent of the kill, and surprised the leopard in the tree. She tried to escape but the lionesses cornered and killed her on the ground. Later on, hyenas scavenge from her carcass.

Confrontation amongst big cats can be fatal, but leopards have a far more deadly competitor—us. From the earliest days, when our ancestors were victims, the tables have turned. Every year, people trap, poison, snare and shoot thousands of leopards because of fear; because they kill sheep and cattle; or because they want their skills.

In Zambia, it's late afternoon and very hot. Our male leopard is making good use of this quiet time to survey his range. He must be familiar with every bush and every small ravine, so when darkness falls and hunting begins, he can utilize this imitate knowledge to his advantage. And on bright moonlit nights, knowing a useful ravine by which to approach his prey, could be the difference between success and failure.

Eventually, satisfied that his territory is in order, he seeks out some quiet shade, for a restorative snooze. His presence is duly noted. He makes the puku wary and nervous, though he poses no threat to them in the day time, as they could easily outrun him at this distance.

They decide not to take any chances. With the disturbance finally over, he at last has the chance to nap. But not for long, with the arrival of a curious visitor. The male leopard pays little attention. And the giraffes, too, soon lose interest.

Then, a bigger problem arrives on the scene: harassment on a grand scale. Baboons, like us, tend to have the upper hand in the day. No longer handicapped by the dark, and with their sight unimpaired, a small troop has discovered him. This is a real threat. Baboons kill leopards, but this time, there are not enough big males to corner him. So they bark and harass him, warning the rest of the troop of his presence.

Even under this pressure, the male is confident enough not to run, which would give the baboons a chance to attack. But he is wary, and a little disturbed.

He tries to tuck himself away, out of their sight, for a little peace. It's a standoff, at least until nightfall, when he can once again regain the upper hand.

[drums]

The moon sets, creating almost perfect darkness, the conditions in which the female and her cub feel most comfortable.

The female has caught a hare for her cub, but he won't share his prize with her. His appetite satisfied, she leaves him alone while she tries to catch something bigger that will last both of them a few days. The black night promises her a good opportunity.

Rolling in the dirt might be playful, or it might help to hide her scent.

In their eagerness to snatch a kill, hyenas try to shadow hunting leopards, but with their clumsy attempts to find the leopard in the dark, they often interrupt and spoil a hunt. Hyenas will generally only attack leopards to steal their kill, so the female stays her ground.

With hyenas dogging her footsteps, she lets time pass, to allow the antelope to settle down and the bored hyenas to depart.

Meanwhile, the cub investigates a prickly problem. Armed with sharp quills and quick reflexes, porcupines are not the easiest of prey for the inexperienced.

Wisely, the cub leaves it well alone.

Since the woodland seems to be clear of hyenas, it's time for his mother to try hunting once again. She employs a new tactic, which appears to break all the rules. Contrary to everything we've seen before, she appears to deliberately stamp her paw. This time, she seems to want the antelope to hear. And now, she raises the pressure by continuing to use sound to cause confusion. Her strategy could only work in near-total darkness.

The antelope can't see her well, but every now and then they can hear her. She's hoping one of them will panic, go the wrong way, and she'll be ready to ambush, hidden in the darkness.

Until now, no one had ever seen or even suspected that leopards used such remarkable maneuvers. One thing is certain: just when you think you understand them, they do something utterly surprising. It is little wonder that the people who live alongside the leopard, and who know it most intimately, should admire it so much, and praise it so greatly.

The beautiful death, who puts on a spotted robe when he goes to his victim. The playful killer, whose loving embrace splits the antelope's heart.

We humans like to think that we run the world. But even in the heart of our great cities, a rival superpower thrives: the ants. These tiny creatures live all around us in vast numbers, though we hardly even notice them. But in many ways, it is they who really run the show. When ants march together, little can stand in their way. Some ten thousand types are known. They outnumber us a million to one, and the total weight of ants matches that of the entire human race.

he first insects emerged during the age of coal, some three hundred million years ago, long before the dinosaurs appeared. The ancient swamps were their kingdom. With no birds to compete with, dragonflies ruled the air. A few were giants, with three-foot wingspans, but only smaller forms survived. Other insects were to succeed them as the premier force. On land, cockroaches thrived. Their line was to persist and multiply. Around a hundred million years later, dinosaurs stalked the land, and a new insect power was emerging. The first wasps worked alone to dig simple nests, but for them, a social revolution was looming. They captured other insects to feed their young. These family bonds gave their line an edge, and the wasps gave rise to the prolific ants. But rival forces were gathering, hidden away in rotting wood. Simple societies of cockroaches began to multiply. Living in family groups was the key to their success. They feasted on decaying wood, but could only digest it with an internal soup of microscopic organisms. Youngsters inherited these vital organisms by feeding directly from their parents. The termites, or so-called white ants, rose from the same stock as the social roaches, and they would become the only rivals of the true ants for numbers and living space. By thirty million years ago, the dinosaurs were long gone. Birds were on the scene, alongside the surviving reptiles. And on land, the greatest insect force of all time was well-established: the fearsome ants. Descendants of the early wasps, they had shed their wings, but retained the powerful jaws and stings to become a major predatory force, outnumbering the remaining wasps by far. Their strength came not just from weaponry, but from working together. Living in close-knit colonies, the ants soon became the most abundant of all insects. Evidence for this ancient success story has come to light through a remarkable process. Sticky sap, oozing over tree bark, proved a fatal attraction, and many insects became trapped. Over millions of years, some of the sap became fossilized as amber, along with its prisoners. The earliest and most wasp-like of all known ants was suspended in sap a hundred million years ago, with every detail preserved.

So, the ants have been around a very long time. This is an actual specimen trapped in plant sap about thirty million years ago, turned into a beautiful fossil. And this is an ant that I just collected last year in Costa Rica. This two are so close together that they might as well be put in the same species. So, the ant way of life is very ancient and very successful. As far as human beings are concerned, we've been around for only one million years—too soon be sure.

All ants belong to extended families, and carry their prey home to share. Unselfishness is the rule. Everything they do is for their colony's good. Close relationships are the basis for their society, for all the active workers are sisters, spawned by a single queen, a larger ant who rules her subjects throughout her life. Some queens live for decades and lay millions of eggs. Workers rarely get to breed, and devote themselves like robot slaves to the colony, tending their youngest sisters, the helpless white grubs. Workers don't calculate the pros and cons of this life; their behavior is programmed. But raising lots of close sisters rather than struggling to breed alone ensures success, both for the colony and themselves. Workers clean the grubs obsessively, and fight off infections in their underground kingdoms with antiseptics from special glands. An ants' nest is like a Swiss watch. Complexity comes from many intricate parts doing separate, simple jobs, all with a clean and humming precision. Collecting food and tending eggs, grubs, and the cocoons of unhatched sisters are all vital chores in the colony's efficient production line. But the only products that count towards long term continuity are the winged males and future queens the colony rears, because the founding of new colonies depends on them. Thousands of young queens and males pour out of harvester ant nests in Arizona each year. On just a few evenings following the summer rains, all the colonies for miles around erupt at exactly the same time. As if at a given signal, they start to take off, encouraged by the workers. Tens of thousands gather, carpeting areas the size of football fields with their bodies. The males fan chemicals into the air to attract queens. And as each one arrives, a cluster of males scrambles to mate with her, for this is an ant orgy, and each male competes to pass on his colony's genes. Mated queens fly off to start new families, while exhausted males expire in drifts on the desert floor. But they've ensured the continuation of a line that goes back for millions of years.

The ants are not only long-lived, but they occur around the world in a tremendous variety of habitats. Even in the frozen forests of the north, there are ants. Nest mounds as high as six feet dominate the landscape, and each one is home to a million or more wood ants. These ancestral piles pass from one generation to the next, and some may date as far back as the nineteenth century.

 In winter, it can drop to minus forty degrees outside. But the ants survive huddled together inside. Toward the spring, the ants produce body heat which warms their homes and helps to melt the snow off the mounds. When the thaw is complete, the ants pour out to sunbathe before setting off to raid the forest like a hungry army. Their winter huddling gives them a head start on other insects, and force of numbers ensures few competitors get in their way. The shifting sands of the Sahara Desert, where surface temperatures reach a hundred and forty degrees Fahrenheit or more, are also home to ants. Desert ants are the only animals to brave the midday sun, and they hunt for other creatures that have died from the heat. They are known to navigate through this featureless landscape by scanning the sky at regular intervals to check the sun's position. They endure higher temperatures than any other land animal. But even they escape the burning surface when they can. These ants are suicidal. They die within a few days in this heat. But their missions are crucial. When they find food, they run straight home. Their colonies persist in one of the harshest places on Earth through navigational skill and heat tolerance, but above all, through the selfless devotion of the workers. But in Ed Wilson's view, tropical rainforests are the true kingdom of the ants. More kinds of plants and animals flourish in these cathedrals of life than anywhere else on Earth. But even here, social insects, especially the ants, rise above all the competition, and are by far the commonest creatures thriving in mind-boggling numbers.

A lot of people think that the forest is teeming with big animals—jaguars, monkeys, snakes, and so forth. They are there, and they certainly are appealing. They're exciting when you run across them. But you don't see them very often. They're very scarce. By far, the dominant creatures are the little animals—the insects, the spiders, and other arthropods that abound at every level in the forest. They're not easy to see if you just stand and look around. But when you probe a little, you see that they are there, in the greatest array and diversity that, I think, has ever evolved on the planet in the three and a half billion years of life's history.

In that one handful of litter and soil is more order and richness and history than in all the planets in the solar system put together. If you dig down into the tangle of rootlets and bits of vegetable matter, you'll see a few ants and a termite or two. You'll see a whole host of springtails and little beetles and a lot of other creatures. It's a miniature wilderness. It would take lifetimes to completely explore. And if you magnify it still more, you'll come to microscopic mites, the little fanged creatures, and tufts of millions of strands of fungi. In just one gram of this material, you can find somewhere in the order of ten billion bacteria belonging to several thousand species, almost all of which are still unknown to science. Among the animals that are visible to the naked eye, the social insects completely dominate. If we were to take all the animals in this forest, from birds and snakes down to little insects and roundworms, we'd find that the ants and the termites make up about one third of the total weight. And I'd say that, within ten yards of where I'm sitting, we could expect to find a hundred or more species of ants and termites alone.

Simple homes protect termites in the humid forests of the tropics. But they build huge fortresses in the harsher conditions of the Australian outback and the African bush. Termites build perhaps the most impressive homes of all animals. In some places, their mounds cover nearly a third of the land surface, and the total weight of termites can equal that of all the mammals in the area. Vast teams of tiny workers build twenty-foot skyscrapers. That's two miles high in human terms. But termites have their limitations. They eat only dead wood and other plant matter, although in huge amounts. But when it comes to killing, they are no match for the fearsome ants, who combine a harmonious homelife with a ruthless approach to their enemies. Columns of Kenyan raid ants set off in pursuit of termites, following a chemical trail laid down by scouts. The ants bunch together as they approach the termites' nest before pouring into their underground chambers. The raiders dump each victim on the surface before returning for more, while others begin to gather up the corpses. At the height of the raid, the surface is littered with dead termites. The raid ends as suddenly as it began, and the ants collect their booty and head home. Each ant carries up to ten termites in its jaws. They've killed over three thousand in the space of ten minutes, not enough to destroy the colony, for they'll need to come back another day. By combining force of numbers with organized aggression, ants have become the greatest insect killers on Earth. But all creatures have reason to fear one particular African ant, whose cavernous shafts descend six feet or more into the ground. These ants live in the biggest single colonies of any animal on Earth, with up to twenty million sisters operating like a huge monster with a monstrous appetite to match. These are driver ants. When they march, nothing in their path is safe. They've been known to kill tethered horses, human babies, and have even been used to execute criminals. Soldier ants stand guard over the marching column. The river of ants divides, spreading out over the forest floor. Few victims escape once the ants get a grip. Millions act like a fearsome super-organism emerging from its lair, sending out long tentacles of marching workers to engulf its prey. A giant slug seems an unlikely target, its thick slime a sticky trap. But the persistent ants overwhelm the slug. They have a neat trick to soak up the slime, sticking tiny fragments of leaf and soil all over the slug. The soldiers now get to work, slicing it up like a beached whale with their powerful jaws. The ants then release their trapped sisters. It's all for one and one for all. The relentless army marches on. Those that can, leap for safety, while others watch from above as hordes of cockroaches and other insects are driven ahead of the raid. Many that escape the ants run right into the path of shrikes and other birds that feast on fleeing insects. There's no safety in fleeing upwards, for the ants follow. A praying mantis is more than a match for just a few ants, but with so many attackers, it can't eat them fast enough. They carry the mantis off, piece by piece. Several ants share the heaviest loads. Workers labor to keep the trail clear. Soldiers form living archways over the columns, and hold back twigs and leaves. It's a genuine team effort. The ants return home, carrying their spoils deep underground, where millions of developing grubs are waiting to be fed. In ant society, no job is left undone for long, and back outside, yet another task force throws out the remains of past victims. Driver ants kills almost everything within range of their nests, and relocate from time to time to find enough food. With no fixed abode, wars between colonies are rare. But in the deserts of Arizona, warfare between ant superpowers is waged non-stop, for these ants have permanent homes, and their cellars are full of treasure. These grotesquely swollen creatures are honeypot ants, and they devote themselves to the colony as living storage pots. In times of plenty, their sisters fill them to bursting with nectar from desert blooms, and demand it back during lean, dry spells. The colony can live on these stores for weeks, but when the weather allows, they venture forth in search of prey. They check out hidden entrances and savage any juicy termites they find. Such a find is best kept in the family, and a scout, on meeting a stranger, runs back to its own nest. Reinforcements pour out to confront the opposition, while others continue to gather termites. Instead of launching straight into battle, these ants limit their losses by aggressive posturing. They square up to rivals, standing on tip-toe to seem as large as possible, while checking the others' size with their feelers. They recognize their sisters by odor, and separate immediately on meeting. They often climb up onto stones, perhaps to appear larger still, for one colony seems to judge another's strength by how many large workers show up. Colonies appear to remember show they fared in recent conflicts, and back off where they've lost before. But if they sense an advantage, they'll send all available forces into battle to drive their opponents back to their nests. As in human warfare, the worst routs occur when one side fails to assess the other's strength accurately. And when forces are poorly matched, posturing soon gives way to fighting, and the smaller colony is overrun. Tactical ant warfare has even attracted interest from defense analysts trying to sharpen up their methods of assessing enemy strength. The victorious ants raid their opponents' nest for the spoils of war, dragging off the struggling honeypots. Damaged honeypots are eaten, the rest forced into bondage, feeding their new masters on demand, a system uncomfortably reminiscent of human slavery. Wise use of military strength pays off for ants, but is force the only way?

Not all ants use violence to dominate their world. Some use more subtle methods to get their way. These particular ants are dairy farmers. They're gently looking after a group of tiny treehoppers, which is a kind of bug that sucks the juice of forest trees. These little creatures, living together in a bunch, offer the ants the excess they get in the form of honeydew droplets, a sweet-tasting liquid that's rich in sugar and amino acids. This kind of relationship has existed for millions of years, long before human beings ever started tending cattle, and some of the connections have become intimately close, as close and ingenious as anything ever devised by human culture. Take, for example, the true herdsman ants of the Malaysian rainforest.

These ants get all their food as honeydew from vast herds of tiny bugs. The bugs rely entirely on the ants to care for them while they busily suck juices from young leaves or unburst flowers. When the plants start to age, the bugs stop feeding and the herdsmen move in. They tenderly gather up every single bug, both young and adult, completely clearing the plant within an hour or two. The herdsmen now head off, taking their precious livestock with them. Following a chemical trail laid down by scouts, the bugs are carried up toward the lushest-growing tips. The herders now release them to begin feeding in their new pastures. The secret of these ants' long-term success lies hidden high in a bamboo thicket. Their nest, deep in an old bamboo log, is the heart of an operation that only a complex society could run. Thousands of ants link legs to form a living cradle to support a new generation of herdsmen. These roofs and walls of living ants also shelter expectant mother bugs, whose tiny yellow young are born here and then taken out to feed. After a few weeks in one place, the living scaffold begins to untangle. The most pivotal event in their farming calendar is imminent. For these herdsmen are nomads, and regularly move the entire operation, taking all their own young and their breeding stock of bugs with them. They take the jungle obstacle course in their stride, linking together to form living bridges over awkward gaps. The colony settles into a new home selected by scouts for easy access to their new pastures.

But ants go far beyond just animal husbandry. They've also become gardeners and agriculturalists, and in so doing, they run a good part of the plant world in a far more intimate and harmonious way than human beings have ever achieved. The South American plant Cecropia has one of the closest relationships of all with ants. Its hollow stem gives them a home, and it provides a daily crop of little white nodules to feed them. The ants harvest this crop rapidly, and carry it back into the nest. The starchy nodules are produced exclusively for the ants, who eat very little else. Inside the stem, the huge queen lives in safety, surrounded by piles of grubs. No home could be better. But why should the plant be so hospitable? When it's threatened, the reason becomes clear. These tiny ants, which are pouring off the tree onto my hand, as the Cecropia plant's private army. Scientists have very appropriately given them the name Azteca, after the Indian warrior nation. Even though they are only a millionth my size, they're able to drive me off pretty quickly with their sharp little jaws. But their real importance is the protection they give against the plant's natural enemies.

Many insects like this beetle feast on Cecropia leaves, unless they meet resistance. But a plant with an army of ants to defend it is safe. Buying protection with ant food pays off in a big way. Cecropia, with a lot of guards, thrive, and the ants affect the plant world in even more spectacular ways. Teams of tiny gardeners shape entire landscapes. Up to half the wild flowers in American woodlands are planted by ants. Spring beauties, violets, Trillium, and many others encourage ants, not birds or mammals, to sow their seeds. Some produce pods which fall and burst open, while others lay their seeds directly on the ground for the ants to distribute. But this is no free service. The ants are enticed by the white flesh on the seeds, whose taste they find irresistible. Unselfish as ever, the ants carry these treats back home to share. Their nest is just below ground, where the ants tend their hordes of hungry young. These tasty prizes attract workers chained to underground duties, for their flesh is a delicious kind of fruit—the strawberries, apples, and melons of the ants. Chewed seeds are dumped in compost heaps inside the nest. They look damaged, but are perfectly healthy, and are ideally placed to germinate. Ants are now known to disperse thousands of different plants around the world for such bribes. In Amazonia, ant horticulture goes even further. Ants grow hanging gardens here, rooted in nests of chewed plant fiber. Right on their doorsteps, all sorts of flowers bloom, and this floral display is more than just for show. The blossoms produce nectar on demand. When the ants take the seeds inside the nest to germinate, the garden is maintained, and new growth ensured. The hanging gardens of Amazonia are a natural wonder, created entirely by ants. And the clearest evidence that ants control their world has just been discovered in the steamy jungles of Peru. Thousands of different plants grow side by side here, more than anywhere else on Earth. And yet, amidst this rampant foliage, are mysterious clearings known as gardens of the devil. Hemmed in by dense jungle, areas the size of tennis courts contain just two kinds of plant, with bare leaf litter below. The Peruvian Indians believe black magic is at work, and leave the fruits well alone. But the gardens really belong to ants. Although these ants are particularly small and feeble, they live in enormous extended families in the hollow stems of the two plants that grow in the clearings. Each day, thousands of ants pour down onto the forest floor. They're waging a long-term war against the encroaching jungle. Every alien seedling is attacked with slashing jaws and herbicide. They spread formic acid from poison glands onto the young shoots, and chew away persistently at leaf stalks to cut off the life-giving sap. Although each ant is tiny, so many attack that every seedling is killed. By weeding out invading plants, they remove potential homes for fiercer ants, and keep areas—in ant terms, the size of New York City—to themselves. But the most famous tropical ants are not so much weeders as plunderers of plants. Leafcutter ants remove more greenery than any other animal from South American forests, and they devastate human crops. They use powerful jaws to slice the thickest leaves. Each segment is the equivalent of a five hundred pound weight. But ants have tremendous strength. Their labors continue day and night, in a complex process involving many ants of all sizes doing different jobs with great efficiency. The scale of the operation is vast. Returning to their nests, leafcutters run the ant equivalent of a marathon, at a four-minute-mile pace all the way.

This is the surface of the nest of just one colony of leafcutter ants. A colony this size can hold as many as two or even three million workers, all the daughters of a single queen that they keep deep down inside the nest. As the foragers go into the nest, they proceed on downward for as much as fifteen, twenty feet. That's, in human terms, equivalent of about a mile. In its life span, the colony can move as much as forty thousand pounds of soil. That's the ant equivalent of the Great Wall of China. That means that the leafcutters are pretty vital elements of the rainforest ecosystem. They move, they aerate, they fertilize more soil than earthworms. A colony like this has the appetite of a full-grown cow, and the colonies all around consume almost a fifth of the vegetation growth every year. It's an onslaught, yet the forest keeps flourishing.

Long-term studies show that leafcutters have favorite targets, and go to great lengths to reach the tender, new leaves high in the canopy. They soon move on to strip other trees along trails they've cut in the forest. In time, the same trees are attacked again, but not before they've recovered fully. We humans are much less careful. People often have a harmful impact on the planet, while the social ants run their world in a more stable way. They have had far longer to get things right. And it shows.

Social existence has paid off in a very big way in evolution. Ants and other social insects are, by a long margin, the most social small animals, and they're also the most abundant. And of course, human beings are, by a wide margin, the most social big animals of any kind. The question I guess I'm most often asked is, what are the similarities between ants and human beings, particularly in their social behavior? And my answer has to be, not many at all. But there are some very important differences, and then you look at those closely, then you do illuminate the human condition somewhat. I guess that the real difference lies in reproductive rights and expectations. Essentially, a worker ant or a bee, wasp, termite, doesn't have any. They are bound to the colony in the way that makes them meaningful only as members of the colony. They are little robots, programmed to do work for the colony to survive. The exact opposite is the case with human beings. We join societies and we work to make them succeed—primarily for ourselves. We've learned how to cooperate to an extreme degree. We are capable of altruism. We do it by the unique genius of human behavior, which is the ability to form long-term binding social contracts. But in doing it, in building up a society that is so enormously successful, we have entered into an eternal paradox, a tension between individuality and self-serving, on the one side, and the needs of the society on the other, that makes individual success guaranteed. And that is, I'm afraid, inherent in the human condition. We will always suffer that tension and walk the fine line. The question inevitably comes to mind, that is these inherent weaknesses in human society ever prove fatal, and if we ruined the planet for ourselves and disappeared, how would our own extinction affect the world we left behind? I believe that ants and other social insects would hold on somewhere, and life would pretty much come back to what it was before we arrived on the scene. Then, the ecosystems would return to a balance, and the ants and the other social insects would be right there with them, filling the environment as before, and going on as before, probably for tens of millions of years into the future.

On this island, there lives a hunter that smells its prey with its tongue, that will ambush pigs, deer, even people, tearing them apart. It looks primitive, like a dinosaur, though it's not.

Komodo dragons are lizards, specifically, monitor lizards, which means they're far from primitive. Of the almost 5,000 types of lizard, monitors are the smartest; some can even count. And while they vary in size as much as an elephant and a mouse, they share a distinctive temperament.

Beneath Central Australia's great deserts, eggs, still and silent for nearly nine months, are showing signs of life. But no doting mother attends the new arrivals. They either make it out of their shells or not, either gain mastery of their bodies, or die trying. And die they well might.

They have no future in this burrow. Their only chance at survival is to claw their way straight up, through more than three feet of baking sand, to the open air. Here, they must seek cover fast, before adults of their own kind take notice and eat them.

No question, it's a hard beginning. But such hardship has molded some extraordinary creatures: a family of about 60 lizard species known as monitor lizards or "Lizard Kings."

Sixty-five million years ago, a cataclysm wiped out the ruling reptiles, the dinosaurs, but monitor lizards survived.

Of the nearly 5,000 types of lizard found today, the monitors are the undisputed kings. Almost half of the monitor species live in Australia. In this desert, one has become top predator, a position usually occupied by mammals. And it's no accident.

True, like all lizards, this species, called the perentie, cannot regulate its body temperature internally, but that doesn't mean they're sluggish. Give them some rays and they have the stamina, speed and smarts of a mammal. And they're big, sometimes six feet long, commanding home ranges of up to 2,000 acres.

Australia's outback harbors all kinds of creatures, not just lizards. It may look barren; actually, it's a patchwork of different habitats, each sheltering its own species. But the lizards stand out, giving the region its nickname, "Land of Lizards," and making it the perfect place for lizard hunters.

Being top predators, monitor lizards hunt down anything smaller than they are, even their own kin. And in a place too hot and dry for most mammals, these lizards rule. They rival many mammals as cunning hunters.

When prowling for food they don't just follow their victim's scent, they do something else; monitors think ahead. These calculating hunters learn and memorize all the major landmarks around. They read the landscape like a map, taking short cuts to hideouts and ambushing prey to avoid energy-draining chases.

When this monitor comes across a hot scent, he follows the trail relentlessly, using special senses that guide him with lethal accuracy.

His target today is an eastern brown snake, one of the world's deadliest. It leaves an unmistakable odor trail, but it's one of many. Other animals have passed this way too. But the monitor can follow the snake's trail and ignore all the others by using his tongue.

Like snakes, monitors have forked tongues. By flicking them in the air or touching the ground, they pick up scents. Every time they pull in their tongues, they read these scents with an organ in the roof of their mouth. It's like tasting and smelling at the same time.

Even more astonishing, the monitor can tell how long ago his prey has passed and in which way it's heading. He never follows a trail backwards. As long as there's a trace of a scent, he follows it, leaving the Lizard King's quarry few options.

Hiding underground could be the snake's escape, but the monitor is as skilled at tracking below ground as above.

The snake has one last defense: its venom can kill a human with a single bite, but not the monitor; he seems to be immune.

If he can't tear his prey apart, he'll swallow it whole and head first.

Being partly solar-powered, reptiles only need 10 percent of the food we mammals need. And if food is scarce, a good meal can last the King for weeks.

In contrast to this tiny hunter, in Indonesia, real-life dragons rule entire islands. And they truly are giants. Up to ten feet long and weighing as much as 200 pounds, the largest Komodo dragons are not only the biggest monitors, but also the biggest lizards now walking the planet.

They will bring down prey as large as deer and water buffalo and occasionally dine on a human. Komodo dragons can devour up to 80 percent of their own weight in a single meal.

This rocky landscape is home to a number of very different creatures like the Kimberley rock monitor. It's a master climber, quick as a wink and constantly on the lookout for anything small enough to grab.

The key to the monitors' remarkable survival story is the one-plan-fits-all body design, which has changed little from the time of the dinosaurs. All monitors can run, climb, dig and swim. The Mertens monitor even has valves in its nose that shut tight when swimming underwater.

But apart from size, monitor species don't differ very much, and they're all armed with the same senses.

During the dry season, Mertens forage for crabs, crayfish and frogs in widely scattered permanent pools, but they inevitably cross paths with their neighbors, and they're not about to share the spoils freely.

Rivals are not tolerated, and much head bobbing accompanies a standoff. It's part of monitor etiquette, a warning to back off or get bitten.

Mertens are skilled hunters, on land and in the water. Just like other monitors, to find food, they flick their forked tongue, except that Mertens pick up scents under water as well. They're surprisingly good fishermen. It's a skill spotted by other predators. Why try to catch fish when you can steal one?

A Lizard King is not so easily outwitted. Survival out here means staying at least one step ahead.

In Thailand, monitor lizards have learned to take advantage of new opportunities. This is the water monitor, which can grow to more than six feet long, and is known locally as the "little crocodile." It's been quick to find a perfect place to prowl: our food-filled cities.

In the center of buzzing Bangkok, the water monitor has invaded water channels and surrounding parks, embracing the urban lifestyle with ease.

Fresh food and garbage are both fair game. And the best spots for a hungry lizard, close to busy market stalls, are usually won in a fight.

Monitors are renowned wrestlers, but they fight for more than just food. These trials of strength increase just before the big rains. The rains mark the start of the mating season. Now the males are pumped up and ready to brawl over females.

This is the one time Lizard Kings break the monotony of their normally solitary lives. The next two months are highly charged, with males marking areas, driving off rivals and making passes at the opposite sex.

Males also release scents, which scientists believe may serve to cow the competition and signal their potency. But it takes a great deal of pushing and shoving to convince a lizard queen that he is the King for her.

Once the couple has found each other, they mate repeatedly. But the female will mate with several other partners, too, so her clutch of eggs will carry the D.N.A. from different males.

Such is the drive to multiply, a female can find herself overwhelmed by suitors. When it's all over, she'll dig an underground chamber and lay a dozen or so eggs. And about eight months later, the young heirs will emerge to found their own urban dynasties.

Bush fires are part of Australian life everywhere, from the deserts to the tropics.

To survive such devastation, each species has its own tactic, but while most animals flee, the Mertens monitor stays cool.

Water gives a degree of protection, and the flames will bring an unexpected bonus. Some predators, like birds of prey, are attracted towards the blaze and become a meal themselves. Insects taking flight from the flames and smoke also drop out of the sky, out of the fire and into the frying pan.

But there's more to bush fires than destruction and free meals. They're one of the reasons why Australia has such rich lizard communities.

Fires carve up the landscape, creating new habitats next to old unburned ones, each supporting different species.

There is no end to an African day. Across the grasslands of the Kalahari, the sunset merely signals a new beginning. As the earth cools in the fading light, zebras, wildebeest and other grazing animals move on. They are relinquishing the night to a new cast of characters. Hidden in the shadows, there is a world which few have ever seen, an endless labyrinth of tunnels and burrows, home to the Kalahari's creatures of the night. The dry season is ending in central Kalahari. As winter turns to spring, warmer night air will soon be greeting the dwellers of these moonlit portals. Not all live underground. A tree gives shelter to this wide-eyed curiosity, nine inches of lesser bush baby, a tiny primate, one of our distant relatives. Excellent eyesight, grasping hands, and an amazing agility make them superb catchers of insects. On the ground, another creature has woken up. These are spring hares. About as big as a rabbit, the spring hare looks like a small kangaroo. It feeds on the remaining dried grasses, and if pursued, it can leap as far as thirteen feet in a single bound. To the left of the bush baby is a tree mouse, one of the smaller and therefore more careful desert predators. Less timid than its neighbor, the bush baby illustrates the art of foraging. The tree mouse scrambles to the ground. Here, it will either find a meal or become one. Larger predators are now emerging. The brown hyena, a rarely-seen scavenger. The hole it calls home is not its own creation. The hyena is merely a squatter in this vast underground burrow stretching out hundreds of yards. Many of Kalahari's smaller inhabitants could not survive without the protection of these ready-made shelters. And this is the master digger, the principle architect for Kalahari's underworld. It is the aardvark. Translated, its name is "earth pig," although the name "antbear" is often used. But it is no relation to pig or bear. The aardvark's nearest relatives are all extinct. It has a long snout to sniff out food and a long, sticky tongue to gather its prey. The aardvark is a timid creature, relying on sound, rather than sight, to alert it to danger. Its diet consists of mostly ants and termites. But despite its vigorous probing, the termites in this mound are not to be found. As the aardvark widens its search, a brown hyena prowls nearby. It is one of the least-glimpsed animals of the Kalahari. Brown hyenas are primarily scavengers, favoring meat from abandoned carcasses over all other food. But they will also consume eggs, fruit, insects—even the occasional mouse. Guided by its keen sense of smell, the aardvark has stumbled upon this: a hill seething with ants. More often, the aardvark must dig for its meal. But tonight, the ants are within easy reach. Many ants attempt to repel the invader. Ineffectual, but irritating nonetheless. A few seemingly-gentle strokes from its sharp claws opens up the hard shell of the mound. Once inside, its long, sticky tongue goes to work. Satisfied, the aardvark prepares for the coming day. It doesn't need to find the entrance to its most recent home. It will simply make a new one, demonstrating its well-earned reputation of master digger. Burrows vary in design. Many are created to serve as temporary shelter, penetrating only a few yards into the ground. Deeper, more elaborate burrows are excavated for use as maternity dens in the rearing of their young. Aardvarks can dig at a prodigious rate and could easily escape capture from anyone with a shovel intent on digging them out. The tail and the hind legs help clear away the soil the massive claws are digging. In less than thirty minutes, the aardvark has disappeared underground, leaving a mound of earth in its wake. Burrows are not kept for long. Once abandoned by the aardvark, they provide life-giving shelter for Kalahari's other nocturnal inhabitants. Porcupines, although capable of digging their own homes, will readily take advantage of these pre-existing burrows. The male porcupine is the largest rodent in Africa and can grow up to 25 pounds. The offspring will need their parents' care for about six months, protected from both heat and cold in this second-hand nursery. Above, the brown hyena is checking for messages. On the grass stems, other hyenas have left special glandular secretions. One longer-lasting scent tells whose territory this is. Another short-lived odor indicates how long ago other hyenas were feeding here. Scent-marking helps the brown hyena keep track of other group members, which may number as many as twelve. It also helps reduce the need to defend their territory. An unwary gerbil is caught with surprising speed. Such a kill is unusual for this nocturnal scavenger. The scuttle scarcely disturbs the bush baby above. It's still scoffing insects. Ever hungry, it thinks it's spotted another victim. Or has it? It looks like a stick. But it did move. The insect unfurls its wings. Not designed for flight, they rattle noisily in an attempt to ward off predators. This bush baby's eyes are bigger than its appetite. And so is this giant stick insect. But curiosity soon banishes fear, and the perhaps not-so-hungry bush baby follows the oddity with the passion of a naturalist. The bush baby decides not to bite off more than it can chew. With the coming dawn, the creatures of the Kalahari's night return to their shelters. Although highly adapted to living in this arid region, they would soon overheat if left exposed. They will sleep through the day, safe from predators and protected from the ferocity of the African sun. Oblivious to the underworld beneath them, zebras move out across the plain, foraging from the sea of dry vegetation that surrounds them. Because of their larger body sizes, grazers like the zebra, can tolerate much higher temperatures. But large or small, wildlife must find life-sustaining water in their food. For in most of the Kalahari, which occupies one-third of southern Africa, there is no surface water from which to drink. For this ant-eating chat, moisture is found in the insects its neighbors will soon be uncovering. Even though they are active during the day, ground squirrels also require protection from the sun. The job of hole digging demands constant activity. Vulnerable and exposed, the ground squirrel's work is often interrupted by having to check for hostile predators. A lot of effort goes into these daytime retreats, and when the ground squirrels abandon them, others move in. Meerkats take advantage of the ground squirrels' inadvertently generous nature, and so are neighbors and squatters beside them on the plain. Even in this tinder-dry scrub, they know how to root out a juicy insect or two. Sweeping the horizon with keen eyes, they are constantly on the alert for any approaching threat. This time, the threat comes from above. One of the season's first storms is approaching. Unaware of the advancing rain, some need a cue to disappear. Nature provides it. Generally, rain falls in the warmer months between October and April. Often, it will come in violent, torrential downpours. Because of these seasonal rains, much of the Kalahari is not, in fact, a true desert, despite its reputation. The rains are often local and patchy. Some areas remain dry for years. Highly tolerant, the vegetation is adapted to these drought conditions, renewing itself through seeds when the life-giving storms finally do arrive. What was a dusty plain will very quickly flush green. The freshly-disturbed earth around each hole in the ground is the first to show new growth. It is burrowing animals that provide the water with a path to flow, allowing it to soak the soil and become available for plants. Fortunately, the tunnels don't flood at every level, and the passage is quickly dried. Soon, life resumes with more predictable patterns. Following the torrent of localized rain, the stage is set for a most spectacular event. Winged termites take to the air just once in their lives. These flyers are called "alates" and are produced to leave the mound in order to establish new colonies. In termite mounds all over the Kalahari, this exodus of potential kings and queens happens just once a year, triggered by strong rains. The rain has brought out other arrivals just beyond the swarming mound. The giant bullfrog's arrival is opportune. It has a taste for termites. Without a strong wind, many of these winged termites will not travel far. Once on the ground, the wings are discarded. Now, kings pursue queens, but not unobserved. This annual phenomenon provides the termites with very little chance for success. Only a few couples will escape. Paired kings and queens equipped with huge fat reserves will hide in cracks in the ground or find refuge in trees. There, each will attempt to found a new colony. Animals of all shapes and sizes come to satisfy their appetites. Even a gerbil will risk leaving its home on this particular night. It's the shifting equilibrium between predators and prey that keeps the Kalahari full of life and under natural control. The delicate sound of rustling wings is a clear signal for the bat-eared fox. Although related, it is not a true fox. Its huge ears and small teeth put it in a sub-family all its own. Most of its food is insects. Special jaw muscles allow it to chew rapidly, ideal for coping with termites. Prey is located primarily through hearing. Using their very specialized ears, they can even detect the movements of insect larvae buried in the ground. The last winged termites leave the mound. The workers are busy sealing the doors for another year. In just a few hours, the spectacle is over. The African hedgehog also took its share of termites, and it will eat almost anything else it comes across. It has longer legs and different facial markings compared to its European cousins. The termites were of no concern to the porcupine family. They are vegetarians. The porcupines love to feast on tsama melons. With a water content of more than 90%, they are a valuable source of moisture. Porcupine pairs are monogamous, and it is the female that initiates mating. She will typically conceive only once a year with litter sizes varying between one and three. They young arrive well-developed, attaining adult body mass in just over a year. Due to the porcupine's effective, defensive spines, suckling begins with a bothersome search. The sought-after nipples are not on the mother's underbelly, but positioned further up on the side of her body, covered and surrounded by sharp quills. Their desire for milk is so strong, they'll put up with this for nearly five months, although they've been able to take solids since they were four weeks old. Baby hedgehogs are totally reliant on their mother's milk. These newborn are waiting for her return. Despite their quills, hedgehogs and porcupines are quite unrelated. Unlike porcupines, the hedgehog mother has no mate to help raise the family she's going back to. When born, the babies' sharp spines have not yet cut through the skin. But over the first two weeks, the eyes open, hair grows, and the spines push through and harden. Very soon, they will have the defensive knack of rolling into an inedible, spiky ball. The burrow will be their den for six to seven weeks. After that time, they'll be expected to venture out on their own. So warm and safe is this home, that when the time comes, their mother may have to push them out. When not raising young, these nocturnal creatures will change their resting places daily, curling up in holes, under bushes, or beneath matted grass. An abandoned termite mound is the home for this familiar-looking creature. But this is no house pet. Called the black-footed cat, it is the smallest member of the Kalahari's wild cat family. What it lacks in size, it makes up in ferocity. Because of its aggressive nature, it is unmanageable in captivity, despite its appearance. Mice are its favorite food, but it will readily attack other small mammals, with a few exceptions, such as this nearby hedgehog, puffing along contentedly in search of food. The black-footed cat approaches. But unwilling to risk the sharp, prickly spines of the hedgehog, it quickly retreats. Black-footed cats have two or three kittens in a litter, and this one can't wait to leave home. The other kittens are not quite as brave and stay home. The bolder kitten is ready for a lesson in hunting technique. He must learn to hunt very quickly in this forbidding environment. Playing follow-the-leader, the kitten duplicates its mother's every move. For the less adventurous, there's always a brother or sister to practice on. The mother returns home, but the kitten is not yet ready to follow. The sound of potential prey prompts the mother to investigate. Another sound, this time of a potential predator, encourages the bold kitten to call it a night. The black-footed cat's larger and more common relatives are feeding tonight. Though sometimes active during the day, lions are primarily nocturnal. As they squabble among themselves, others are tempted out by the smell of blood in the air. Unlike spotted hyenas, which hunt and kill in packs, the brown hyena won't disturb the meal. They'll wait until the lions leave before approaching the carcass. Until then, it's time to be patient and indulge in a display of affection. Hyenas are perhaps one of the most misunderstood and maligned of creatures. Because of their eerie nighttime calls and secretive, scavenging nature, they are considered animals of doom and misfortune among many African natives. Their true nature is rarely, if ever, seen. The lions leave. Now they can venture in and sift through what's left. Brown hyenas have remarkable digestive systems and an unusual range of tastes in food. They will even eat fruit, an important supplement in this arid region. After finding a kill, they will readily eat what other animals have discarded. Their powerful jaws can crush bone, which contains nutritious marrow inside. Not much is left of this springbok ram, but it's a better meal than many. Sometimes, brown hyenas will travel as much as thirty miles in a single night. Even then, they may only pick up a few scant insects for their efforts. Nothing goes to waste in the Kalahari. As the wet season runs its course, the sun rises over a sea of green. This lush, flowered garden will be put to good use until the plains, once again, dry out. A feast awaits the mostly vegetarian ground squirrel. It may eat an insect now and again, but its diet consists primarily of leaves, grass, bulbs, roots, and on this day, seeds. Like most of Kalahari's creatures, it receives moisture from its food and can live without the presence of standing water. Aptly named, ground squirrels are poor climbers, but they will scramble up the occasional bush in search of berries. Otherwise, feeding is strictly a terrestrial activity. After the meal, it returns to work on the den. The damp soil is easy to remove. But for the moment, play takes precedence. But these days of plenty will soon be over. In March, as the dry season descends, temperatures soar to over 100 degrees. Only a ruffled dry carpet of grass remains. Hard at work on these grasses are harvester termites, one of many insect families that farm the Kalahari. They cut down stalks of dry grass to a manageable size and drag them down into their tunnels thirty feet below—provisions against harder times. Waiting to feed upon the termites are predators like the scorpion and the ant-eating chat. Each termite, worker or soldier, is a succulent snack. For predators, they are small packets of life-sustaining moisture. Close by, a sand wasp is preparing for its future. She's paralyzed a caterpillar which she will take into a hole she dug earlier. First, she'll have to open the entrance. On the living caterpillar, she lays one egg. Soon, the paralyzed victim will be a fresh meal for her single larva. Before leaving, the small stone over the opening is replaced. She may repeat the same process a dozen times in her lifetime. Still working on the stalks of dried grass, the termite's habit of moving plant material underground plays an enormous role in nutrient cycling. Their fat-rich bodies are also a key link in the Kalahari food chain. The ant-eating chat has more than a beakful ready to bring to her brood in a very unusual home. Such a wealth of food enables the chats to nest in this dry time of year. But where? She's at the entrance to an aardvark burrow, now occupied by a brown hyena. The resident doesn't seem to mind the intrusion. Both parents are feeding the chicks whose cries are coming from a hole in the roof of the tunnel. Although it can excavate its own burrow for nesting, it more often chooses the ready-made shelter of an aardvark hole. The dry season is also nesting time for the world's largest bird. The male ostrich is about to change places with the female. It's now his turn to incubate the eggs. Heat is the biggest enemy. The temperature is high, even in the shade. Unattended, eggs can easily spoil in the Kalahari sun. Other females also lay eggs in the nest. This minimizes the risk of losing an entire clutch to predators. But each set of parents knows its own eggs and tries to keep them positioned in the center of the nest. During these daytime vigils, the ostrich can become heat-stressed. But it can tolerate the loss of up to 25% of its body weight in water without ill effect. In the heat of the day, soil temperature can rise to over 150 degrees. But in the labyrinth of burrows beneath this scorching landscape, it can be as much as 50% cooler. For the Kalahari's nocturnal creatures, this retreat is key to their survival. Daytime grazers also seek protection when temperatures are at their highest. Lying in the shade of trees or bushes helps reduce water loss and keeps body temperatures from soaring. Diurnal animals have adapted in other ways. Pound for pound, they require less water and use less energy to survive. Their body tissue can also store a much larger amount of heat. Six weeks after being laid, the ostrich eggs have hatched, sending as many as ten miniature versions of their parents out into the world. They will grow at a remarkable rate, from six inches to eight feet in their first year. But not all the eggs hatch. Sometimes, despite the best efforts of their parents, they become spoiled in the heat and are abandoned. The failures will not go to waste. The eggs represent nourishment for the less discerning of Kalahari's night life. As the dry season advances, the sun's warming rays quickly dissipate into the clear evening sky. Because of the region's relatively high altitude, temperatures in winter can drop below freezing. Cold becomes another enemy. But tonight, winter's grip has not yet taken hold, and the Kalahari's nocturnal prowlers are free to roam. The denizens of the underworld stir in their burrows. The bush babies seem less interested in grasshoppers this evening and more interested in each other. The master digger ventures out, concerned—quite literally—with sticking to its diet of ants and termites. It's just a slight distraction to the bush babies, who are keen on courtship. The prelude to mating involves the gentlest of caresses. And then, a series of gymnastic displays, leaping up to fifteen feet in a single bound. The hyena has caught the smell of rotting ostrich eggs. They're a welcome seasonal bonus. Hyenas have been observed removing over twenty eggs from a nest, one by one, hiding them for later. For all but a few animals, these eggs present a tricky problem. Ostrich eggs are designed to be broken from the inside at the right time. The hyena will need to use its bone-crushing jaws. With a little persuasion, the egg gives up its spoiled contents to an animal with just the stomach for such a pungent delicacy. Another of the Kalahari's underground creatures surfaces to find its first meal of the night. The conspicuous coloring of the striped polecat warns others to stay clear. Like the skunk, it will release a nauseating spray if threatened. Its diet is primarily insects, but it will readily consume more exotic fare. Scorpions hide in other animals' burrows as well. Like almost everything else, it's looking for a meal. It has a powerful sting, but against a much larger predator, it stands little chance of escape. To the striped polecat, the scorpion is not a difficult challenge. The larger predator first bites off the tail which can deliver a painful sting. To the scorpion, termites were thirst-quenchers. Now, it unwillingly provides the same service for the striped polecat, a link in the chain of appetites foraging in the dark. Changing seasons mean changing diets for the hunters and scavengers of the Kalahari's night. As the weather cools, it is often ants, and not termites, that are more readily-available for feasting. During the meal, the aardvark will inadvertently consume grass seed the ants have stored. Because he cannot digest the seed, it will be deposited on soil which the aardvark then buries. Beyond his title of master digger, the aardvark is one of the Kalahari's master planters as well. And so, it's on to the next job at hand, an after-dinner dig which will take the aardvark into the deepest recesses of the underworld, providing once again additional shelter for those less capable of such grand excavation. A master bedroom in the making. Familiar sounds and smells alert the nocturnal cast of the imminent sunrise. Travel-weary but well-fed, the brown hyena returns to its burrow. The others soon follow suit. Soon, the only traces left of these strange creatures will be the dark portals to their hidden world. Gone, but not forgotten. The creatures of the night play a vital role in the regeneration of this arid land. Without them, this fragile web of life would all but disappear.

On the island of Madagascar, 500 miles off the coast of Africa, there lies a strange and mysterious place. It is filled with bizarre landscapes and creatures that exist nowhere else on Earth. Shut off by battlements of razor-sharp cliffs, this is a true lost world.

It is called Ankarana, "The Place of the Rock." Here, the animals have secrets. Madagascar is famous for its lemurs, the limber, wide-eyed acrobats that fill the treetops. But in this hidden kingdom, there are lemurs virtually unknown to science.

And they aren't the only ones in Ankarana with something to hide. In this distant corner of the world, a creature we thought we knew has started doing the unthinkable. This strange behavior may hold tantalizing clues to the crocodile's success, because these killer reptiles are relics from the age of the dinosaurs.

For millions of years, Ankarana has guarded its secrets—until now.

For 2,000 years, the forbidding cliffs of Ankarana have kept the human world at bay. But it's not just the dizzying heights of these thousand-foot limestone walls that discourage intruders. These rocks are lethal. Over the eons, rain has turned the mountain into a million knives of stone, pointing to the sky. This is no place for climbers, at least not human ones.

But some creatures have mastered the art of walking on daggers. These intrepid explorers are crowned lemurs. With extra thick padding on their fingers and toes, negotiating the deadly needles of stone is like a walk in the park. That is, most of the time; accidents can happen.

The only place in the world that lemurs are found is here in Madagascar. The entire island is smaller than the state of Texas, and up near its northern tip is the natural fortress of Ankarana, just five miles wide and 15 miles long.

Almost all the crowned lemurs—one of about 50 different kinds of lemurs—live here. Walled off from human intruders, the crowned lemurs' struggle for survival has gone on in secret.

Now, we are getting our first glimpse at this beguiling creature and the secret bag of tricks that's kept it alive in one of the harshest environments on Earth.

Make no mistake, Ankarana is a dangerous place. If the jagged cliffs don't kill you, then one of these might. This toothy grin belongs to the Nile crocodile. Originally from Africa, an ancestor of this 16-foot killer made its way across the ocean to set up shop in this isolated place. Nowadays, these creatures devour about 100 people every year in Madagascar.

If human isn't on the menu, then they'll gladly settle for zebu, the local brand of cattle. Not surprisingly, crocodiles don't have a lot friends in Madagascar, and in many areas, they are stalked and killed. But even here, the crocodile has its fans.

Around the globe, crocodiles, and their cousins the alligators, are known as dedicated sun-worshippers. Being cold-blooded, crocs need the heat to maintain their body temperature. If they aren't warm enough, they can't hunt, and eventually, they will die.

So why on earth would these animals choose to live in complete darkness in a cool, damp cave? Now that he's seen this unusual behavior for himself, Olivier wants to find out. To do that, he'll have to delve much deeper into the strange world of Ankarana.

Made mostly of stone, Ankarana is riddled with canyons and caves. Two hundred million years ago, these cliffs were an underwater coral reef. Over the eons, it was shoved upwards, above the sea, where rain sliced and diced the rock. Earthquakes split the limestone, creating the narrow canyons.

These are Ankarana's secret gardens, a last refuge for unique creatures like the crowned lemur.

To look at a lemur is to gaze into our distant past. Lemurs are primitive primates, called "prosimians," a line more ancient than monkeys or apes. Over 40 million years ago, the ancestor of these lemurs was probably swept out of Africa during a flood, and floated to Madagascar on some storm-tossed debris. Monkeys never made the trip.

As the only primates in town, the prosimians flourished, diverging into dozens of different kinds of lemurs. And they've developed a lifestyle very different from their monkey cousins'.

In lemur society the females rule the roost. This troop operates under the singular gaze of a one-eyed queen.

It's the end of the dry season, and all the females of the troop are carrying an extra burden, their newborn babies. Lemurs are always on the go, and it's up to the babies to hang on for dear life.

With crowned lemurs, it's easy to spot the inferior sex. The males are branded with a distinctive black V on their heads. They may not call the shots, but male lemurs do serve a purpose. They have the job of marking the troop's territory with secretions from their scent glands. Every day, the crowned lemur troop patrols the 35 acres of forest they claim as their domain.

Today, they catch some intruders. A few neighboring lemurs have snuck in, looking for food. This small-scale rumble in the jungle is mostly a shouting match. The forest is crowded, and every bit of food in the troop's territory is precious.

Having won the battle, the queen leads her troop to a stream near a cave, but they don't let their guard down. They know that predators lurk on the ground and in the water. The lemurs aren't surprised to find crocodiles in the caves. They've learned the hard way to beware the darkness.

But for humans who study crocodiles, the idea that they've become cave dwellers is mind-boggling. Determined to learn more about Ankarana's nonconformist crocs, Olivier and Angelin decide to investigate downstream.

Most people on a canoe trip would steer clear of a group of large, man-eating reptiles, but these researchers are thrilled when a sun-baked riverbank turns out to be a crocodile hotspot.

Crocodiles are the last surviving vestige of an ancient and powerful group of animals, the ruling reptiles. The first crocodilians date back 200 million years to the age of dinosaurs. And some of the early crocs were huge—35-foot monsters that ate dinosaurs for breakfast. No one knows exactly how crocodiles were able to survive when all the other large reptiles went extinct.

Throughout Madagascar, Nile crocodiles are feared and despised. But here in Ankarana, things are different.

In fact, at one sacred lake, people go out of their way to make the crocodiles happy. According to an Ankarana legend, once upon a time, a sorcerer became angry with the local tribe. As punishment, he turned them into crocodiles.

Since many view the crocodiles as their ancestors, it has become taboo to kill them. People here are also friendly with crowned lemurs. They believe the lemurs have human souls, and so, the locals protect them, along with the crocodiles.

This makes Ankarana a very special refuge.

Since humans arrived in Madagascar 2,000 years ago, much of this tropical forest has been destroyed. Many unique creatures have gone extinct, including about 15 species of large lemurs. Today's lemurs are all fairly small; the biggest ones weigh only a few pounds. But not too long ago, the forests were home to lemurs the size of a male gorilla.

The loggers have made their way to the outskirts of Ankarana. Up until now, the rocky fortress, along with the local people, have protected the animals here. So today, the forest remains a sanctuary and a fine place to raise a lemur family.

This little lemur is about six weeks old. And now, for the first time, her mother allows her to explore a little and practice her climbing skills, but only in a nice, dense thicket. The one-eyed queen keeps her young son close.

She's wise to be wary, because lurking in these trees, is an animal who is highly skilled at killing lemurs. It is called the "foosa."

A lemur is no match for a motivated foosa. Trying to escape, the queen heads for the highest and smallest branches, which should be too weak for the heavier foosa. From there, the only way out is to jump.

It looks like there'll be no lemur for lunch today. But that's okay, because the foosa is not a fussy eater.

Falling into a trance-like state, the female lays up to 80 eggs. She kicks sand over the nest to protect it from the sun. If the eggs get too hot, her babies will boil in their shells. Nesting is carefully timed near the end of the dry season. All the animals of Ankarana must stay in sync with the ebb and flow of the seasons.

For the crowned lemurs, the next big event is all about food. The hundred-foot giant fig is starting to fruit, and it's a lemur magnet.

The queen is quick to lead her troop to the fig tree. For some of the youngsters, it's the first time on such a giant tree, and the climb is dizzying. They'll settle for fruit on one of the lower branches.

The figs will last a couple of weeks, and even this tough troop will not be able to keep them all for themselves. They'll have to share.

Today, the fig tree is also full of Sanford's lemurs. They're close cousins of the crowned lemurs, but not friends.

Like the crowns, it's easy to tell the sex of the Sanford's lemurs. Each male's face is framed by a showy ruff collar of white fur, while the brown females have a less flamboyant style.

Besides sharing the same taste in food, both the Sanford's and the crowns have something else in common. They are active during the day, which isn't true for all lemurs. There are other kinds of lemurs living in Ankarana who are more difficult to see because they operate primarily at night.

Recent advances in technology have suddenly opened up the dark side of Ankarana. Ultra-sensitive cameras can now record by moon- and starlight.

This flashing sparkler is actually a firefly.

As night falls, the bats awake and head out of their cozy caves into the forest to search for food. This lepilemur emerges from its home in a hollow tree. With its cute, wide-eyed baby face, it's typical of Ankarana's nocturnal lemurs.

But there's one night-stalking lemur that won't be winning any beauty contests. This strange-looking creature is called the "aye-aye." Unlike all the other lemurs, the aye-aye is covered in coarse hair and has giant bat-like ears. And then there's its most bizarre feature, an extra-long middle finger that is not much more than a thin needle of bone. There are no woodpeckers in Madagascar, instead there is the aye-aye.

As it climbs, it taps on the tree, its giant ears well-tuned to detect the slightest change in sound. If it hears a hollow spot or some movement, the aye-aye gnaws a hole with its large, rabbit-like teeth. It then uses its long, skinny finger to harpoon the unsuspecting grub.

Because of its strange appearance, some local tribes believe the aye-aye to be evil, and, like many animals in Madagascar, it has been hunted to the brink of extinction. Ankarana is one of its last haunts.

When the dry season ends and the rains come to Ankarana, it's a mixed blessing. Lemurs don't seem to enjoy the downpours very much. But they'll certainly appreciate the results.

Rejuvenated by the rains, the thirsty plants of Ankarana suddenly burst into bloom. Fresh flowers are especially appetizing to the crowned lemurs. The petals are easy to digest and the pollen is full of protein.

This is the perfect time for mothers to wean their babies, though the little ones might not agree—especially the queen's son, who seems reluctant to give up his princely perch on his mother's back.

For him, life is about to get a lot less cushy. The youngest male in the troop, he's suddenly at the bottom of the pecking order, as his little female cousins are happy to point out.

The new generation is curious about everything around them in the Ankarana forest. And the possibilities for entertainment are endless. Today, they're captivated by a courtship dance performed by a pair of chameleons.

With chameleons, nothing can be rushed, especially not romance. A crucial part of this tango is the costume—the brightly colored male signals his amorous intentions with a red-hot eye. Chameleons can rotate their eyes in a wide arc, always on the lookout for danger. So even when passion calls, they won't be caught with their pants down, so to speak.

For the young lemurs, the show is too interesting to ignore. But for the female chameleon, such a large audience ruins the mood.

Finding his date so rudely interrupted, the male's eye is no longer flush with passion. Now, it's black with rage.

But he's sure to try again, because in Ankarana, the rainy season is the best time for having babies.

On the riverbanks, a distinctive sound is announcing some new arrivals. This is the call of baby crocodiles, ready to hatch from their shells. Finally one breaks free. Is it a boy or a girl?

The sex of crocodiles is determined by the temperature of the nest. Between about 91° and 93° Fahrenheit, mostly males will develop; a few degrees above or below produces females. This year has been particularly warm, so almost all of these hatchlings are girls.

As they struggle from their shells, they are in grave danger. They could be eaten by predators or suffocate if they can't escape the underground nest in time.

But help is on the way. It's their mother. She's been guarding the nest for several weeks, and now, hearing her babies' cries, comes immediately to their aid. Unlike some reptiles, who abandon their young to fend for themselves, crocodile mothers are the picture of devotion.

These jaws could easily rip a limb from a large mammal, but for a baby crocodile, it's the safest place in the world. One by one, the mother carries her brood to nearby nursery pools, where she'll continue to look after them.

But the rainy season was shorter than usual in Ankarana this year, and the pools may soon disappear. If hot, dry weather continues, then the young crocodiles will be forced to move on, in search of a wetter home.

The lack of rain is putting pressure on every creature in Ankarana. Inside the hidden forests, the trees aren't producing their usual crop of fruit. The troop has to settle for eating leaves, even though many are poisonous.

To flush out the toxins, the lemurs need to drink water, and soon. The only water nearby is caught in a few tree hollows.

As always, ladies first—the queen and the other females make sure they get their fill before giving way to the males. And the youngest male drinks last, if there's any left.

With food and water in short supply, the lemurs are forced to descend from the treetops and scavenge on the ground. In times of need, crowned lemurs will quickly abandon their vegetarian diet and try to eat just about anything. This forest crab is well-armored, and doesn't seem worth the trouble. But the shell of this giant pill bug is no match for a lemur's teeth, and the pulpy insides are finger-lickin' good.

But there are some creatures that even a lemur knows it's better to avoid. As resources dwindle, competition with other animals becomes fierce. And no one is more annoying to a crowned lemur than its greedy neighbor, the ring-tailed mongoose.

Once again, the queen and her gang exert their dominance, and the intruders are driven away.

The pools left by the rains are shrinking. Every living thing must somehow adapt or die. This is especially true for the crocodiles. With their nurseries quickly evaporating, the babies must search for a new home.

Though crocodiles love to bask in the sun, water is crucial. Here, they can stalk their prey. They can court and mate with their partners. And they can cool down when the heat of the day gets too much to bear.

As the rivers dwindle to narrow creeks, crocodiles young and old head upstream in search of deeper water. These journeys can be dangerous, for along the river live people.

Hungry animals will eat humans, but more often when the two come together, it is the crocodiles who are hunted.

Killing crocodiles is taboo in most of Ankarana, but that may be changing. Skins like this one are highly valued on the international market.

But Olivier thinks the crocodiles of Ankarana may have one last trick up their sleeve: the crocodile caves. Following the rivers upstream, the crocodiles come to the rocky outcrop where the waters disappear into underground caverns. Olivier believes the crocodiles are drawn here, not just as a great source of water, but as a safe haven from human predators.

But how is it possible for these sun worshippers to survive in this cool, dark underworld? While temperatures outside can soar above a hundred degrees, inside the cave, it dips to around 70.

If you look close enough, you'll see that this cave is teeming with life. Bats play a crucial role. These are fruit bats, hanging out with their young. The bats dine outside the cave at night, but during the day, they return to sleep. Inside, they bless the cave with plenty of droppings. Bat guano, along with decomposing bat corpses, provides lots of nourishment for creatures like maggots and crickets and this poisonous tarantula.

And there's plenty of life under water as well. There are shrimp and tiny fish, who over the eons have become completely blind.

Even if there's not a lot of big game, it turns out that an adult crocodile can live for months on one good meal.

All the pieces of the crocodile puzzle seem to be coming together. But for Olivier, one major mystery remains. Crocodiles have excellent eyesight and can see well at night, but in the depths of the cave, there is no light at all. How do they find their way through miles of winding passageways?

No one knows. The mystery only deepens Olivier's respect and admiration for the crocodiles. Once again, they've proven their tremendous resilience and adaptability. No wonder creatures like these have been roaming the earth since the age of the dinosaurs.

Outside the caves, the dry season wears on. Many animals will be drawn inside, though most will not venture very far. The one-eyed queen and her troop of crowned lemurs are very wary of the caves, but sometimes they are the only source of water and so they must go.

Today, the queen's oldest daughter leads the way into the depths. This time, the lemurs were too quick to get caught in the snapping jaws. But soon enough, they'll be back, for in Ankarana, water is precious. To come here is dangerous, but to stay away could be suicidal.

Here in this isolated corner of the world, lemurs and crocodiles have both turned to the dark, wet caves in times of crisis. And in this harsh landscape, their willingness to journey to the strange underworld has turned out to be the secret of their survival.

Bees have been busy for millions of years now, and they're not about to stop anytime soon.... Foragers still return from the fields with nectar.... While guard bees still watch and wait.

There's treasure in this beekeeper's hive, and all are sworn to protect it with their lives.

Suddenly, an intruder comes flying in. A wasp, hoping to capture a bee, and feed it to its hungry grubs.

The battle begins in earnest.

The wasp is larger, but the bees make up in numbers what they lack in strength.

They sting the invader relentlessly.

For the individual bee, it's a suicide attack. The bee's stinger and part of its abdomen will be ripped from its body when it pulls away.... But the defense of the colony is the only thing that matters.

Paralyzed by venom, mortally wounded, the wasp is unceremoniously dragged to the edge of the hive...and dumped.

Just an ordinary day of birth, death, sex and violence. And it's not even noon yet.

Ah, spring. After a long winter, it's time to get outside and drink your fill of nectar.

If you're a honey bee, this is your field of dreams.

Bees get almost all of their food from flowers.

Attracted by the bright colors and sweet smells, the bee thrusts its body and long, straw-like proboscis deep inside the flower and sucks up the sugary nectar at the bottom.

Pollen, the bees' source of protein, is also on the shopping list.

While the bee is gathering nectar, pollen collects on the small hairs of its body.

To carry it safely, the bee stows it away in sacks on its hind legs.

A bee can carry its own weight in pollen and nectar, and still fly... barely.

Some food will fuel the bee's own activity, but most will be saved for the communal hive.

As soon as they return, the foragers prepare to unload their cargo. Other workers are waiting to help them.

A full load of nectar fills nearly half of a bee's abdomen.

The foragers bring up the nectar from their stomachs into their mouths. Household bees then suck it out.

As the nectar is passed on, from one bee to another, it's processed by enzymes in the bees' bodies.

The nectar is then tipped into storage cells. It takes about five days for it to thicken and ripen into honey.

When the process is complete, the honey cell is sealed with wax, like a lid on a jar—to be opened when needed.

Pollen is stored separately, in other cells.

Later, it's mixed with honey, and used, for the most part, to feed the young.

The bees pack it down to make room for the next load—and the next.

Together, the dark pollen cells and lighter honey cells make up the bees' pantry.

The search for nectar and pollen lasts as long as the light does.

The flowers are not just being charitable. By luring the bees, they get them to carry pollen from one blossom to another.

A flowering plant can't reproduce unless it gets pollen from another flower of the same type. Without bees, most would die.

When a scout bee discovers a rich new source of food,it must tell the others how to get there.

This is the waggle dance. Pay close attention.

To learn the location of the nectar,watch how fast the bee waggles its body, listen to the sounds it makes, and remember the speed, direction, and number of patterns in the dance.

It's the bees' version of a map.

Directions are always given in relation to the sun—to the right of it, the left, or dead ahead.

Success at last.

Mmm, nice nectar....

It takes the nectar from five million flowers to make one pint of honey.

Each bee may visit hundreds of blossoms in a day and work a twelve hour shift.

They make about ten journeys in a day, with each trip lasting roughly an hour.

Today, just like yesterday, there is no rest for the weary.

Most worker bees live for only about a month. They simply wear out.

There's a constant need for replacements, so feeding and raising the young takes up much of the hive's energy.

There are three types of bees here: the female workers, the male drones, and the queen.

The workers are the smallest. But they do all the work of the hive, from nursing the young to foraging. Every few days, they take on a new job, running through all of them in the course of their lives.

The drones, who are medium-sized, mate with the colony's queen—their one and only job. They don't forage for food. They don't even have stingers to protect themselves.

The queen has only one job, too, but it's the most important of all. She must lay the eggs for the next generation of workers, drones, and even her own replacement.

But first the queen must mate, and to do that, she must leave the hive.

She sets off on her first mating flight when she's about a week old.

She must join a gathering of drones at precisely the right moment.

When the queen appears, she's immediately surrounded by the males, who follow her unique scent.

Each of the dozen or so drones who get to mate with the queen dies in the act.

The queen flies back to the hive immediately, her body carrying the sign of success... what's left of the male.

She'll make a few more mating flights in the coming days, / and then have enough sperm in her body to fertilize eggs for the rest of her life, which may last from one to four years.

It's now time for the beekeeper to pay his respects to her royal highness.

But he comes with an ulterior motive.

A mated queen can be sold to another beekeeper who wants to establish a new colony. Such valuable property needs to be marked, like the brand on a steer.

Every day, the queen will lay about 1500 eggs.... Two hundred thousand in a year.

It's a tough job, but someone has to do it.

The queen's royal scent prevents the female workers from laying eggs themselves.

It takes a few days for the eggs to grow into larvae.

They are then bathed in a special food, brought to them by workers.

During its first day, a larva eats so much, its weight increases five-and-a-half times. / In six days, its weight increases 1500 times.

The larvae then spin cocoons and pupae develop inside, until they emerge two weeks later as adult bees.

The queen only stops laying eggs when the weather grows colder, in November.

Each bee makes the metamorphosis from egg to larva to adult in about three weeks.

And there's little surprise about the newborn's sex, since every worker is a female, and almost every bee is a worker.

In a colony of tens of thousands, only a hundred bees are born male.

The dome-shaped covers of their brood cells provide extra space for their larger bodies.

Worker bees act as midwives to assist them.

But a worker herself has to fight her way out of her brood cell unaided. No coddling allowed here.

Soon the worker will follow her well-ordered behavioral cycle, beginning with cleaning her own cell.

The males, on the other hand, receive special care. They're helped out of their cells and immediately fed.

In an otherwise society of equals, the male does not have to work. Even his name, "drone," is another word for an idler.

His large compound eyes tell of his sole purpose in life: sighting the queen on her mating flight.

In a honey bee colony, every member has a specific task to perform and everything has its place.

When the colony grows so large that the bees begin to run out of room, they instinctively know it's time for the old queen to leave with half the population, and a new queen to be crowned.

First, construction needs to begin on special queen cells, in which a dozen or so new, would-be queens will grow.

This is the most exclusive neighborhood in the hive.

As eggs, all bees are equal. But by feeding grubs a steady diet of "royal jelly"—a mixture of milky secretions—they're turned into queens.

But before the new queens hatch, the old queen must leave, accompanied by thousands of workers who are close enough to follow her scent.

They swarm out of the hive in a mad, swirling rush.

Not far from the hive, the old queen lands to rest, and the swarming bees follow her.

Whenever and wherever she lands, they collect around her to keep her safe and at the right temperature. / She's their future: The only member of the colony who can lay eggs and produce the next generation.

But swarming bees consume a great deal of energy. Whatever food they had in their stomachs is quickly used up, so they have to stop to gather more nectar.

Any food not used by a foraging bee is shared.

Scouts check out possible sites for a new hive. / But with each hour, the danger grows. Out in the open, the bees are extremely vulnerable to predators and bad weather.

Many swarms die when they can't find a new site fast enough.

But this time, the bees are in luck. They immediately take possession of a hollow fruit tree.

Every inch is carefully examined.

Naturally the tree is a bit musty, so they air it out using their wings as fans.

Then they spread a special scent from a gland on their abdomen. The sweet smell of home—it makes the new address official, and allows stragglers to find their way.

Inside the tree, the bees form living chains. Not having a ruler handy, it's their way of taking measurements, in preparation for the construction work, which has to begin as soon as possible.

Bees are natural engineers. / They're also gymnasts, excellent at holding on to each other's legs.

Outside, there's a steady stream of new arrivals.

The tree seems to meet with their unanimous approval, especially the rustic décor.

Cell upon cell and row upon row, the hive is built.

Each sheet of cells is called a comb.

The worker bees have wax-secreting glands in their abdomens to produce a steady supply of building material.

But there's a high price to pay. To produce the energy to make an ounce of wax, it takes a pound of honey.

Every cell is a hexagon, sharing a wall with six adjacent cells.

The comb has two layers of cells, with a base between them. That way, there can be open cells on both sides.

The wax can be incredibly thin without weakening the structure. A feather-light comb can support pounds of honey.

The more cells that are built, the more bees can be born—and the new colony's survival ensured.

It's now midnight.

Under the penetrating gaze of an owl, the original colony rests, while other creatures stir.

There's a visitor to the hive tonight: A mouse, trying to keep out of the way of owls and bees alike. It's not after honey, but warmth and safety, and a snack.

The owl is none the wiser.

The mouse can smell the danger above.

There lies the realm of the bees, where mice are not welcome.

He makes a modest meal of crumbs from the comb.

The bees are keeping the brood cells at an even 95 degrees Fahrenheit—just the right temperature for a chilly mouse.

The scent of honey is carried on the night air. And some creatures will go to great lengths to steal it.

This is the Death's Head Hawkmoth. Its sinister name comes from the shape of a skull emblazoned on its back.

The moth's limbs are stiff from the cold night air. By shivering, it warms its body up before taking flight.

The moth is risking its life on a dangerous mission.

It lands at the entrance, surrounded by guard bees ready to protect the hive, but there's no sign of defence. The moth walks boldly past the guards and enters the hive.

The moth's camouflage is perfect. It produces chemicals that mimic the scent of the beehive.

To the bees, having the right smell is more important than being the right size.

But just in case, the moth uses another deception. It makes sounds that would normally come only from a queen bee.

With these disguises, the moth can plunder the honey cells unchallenged. The hive bees notice the loss of honey, but not the robber in their midst.

The moth sucks four or five honey cells dry. But the scent of the hive is beginning to wear off, and if he's caught, he'll never make it out alive.

He escapes just in time.

Spring now turns to summer. / Not only is the harvesting season short, but all sorts of unpredictable events can force the bees to stop. And what's more unpredictable than the weather?

All those who can, return quickly to the hive. Those who remain, face the full force of the rain.

The bees are forced to seek shelter from the downpour.

Rain poses a real threat. The bees can become so chilled by the water that their muscles no longer function efficiently. They are grounded, unable to fly.

Even the guard bees back at the hive are rendered useless, numbed by the cold.

It's a good time for the mouse to return, without the risk of being stung.

A cluster of sodden bees hangs outside the entrance. Too many foragers tried to seek shelter in the hive at the same time.

But the mouse still needs to be careful. Once the bees dry out, their reaction will be considerably different. They are not generally known for their hospitality.

The bees have reason to be wary. There are enemies everywhere, and of these, one of the most dangerous is the bird ominously known as "the bee-eater."

With a brood of hungry chicks in their nest tunnels, the birds need to meet a constant demand for food.

Unfortunately for the bees, the birds are unaffected by the venom in their stings.

A single bird can kill 500 bees a day... A whole group can wipe out a colony.

The best the bees can do is become an irritation. But the bee eater's thick layer of feathers renders most attacks ineffective.

Nearby, the dreaded hornets are also rearing their young. With hungry hornet grubs to feed, attacks against the bees increase in intensity.

The bees counter attack. But no individual stands a chance against a hornet.

The invader quickly disables the bee's flight muscles.

The hornets are nightmare neighbors. They'll remain a constant menace to the bee colony for the rest of the summer.

Out in the countryside, the work continues.

There are thousands of different kinds of bees, but only one kind that produces honey.

The honey bee can smell with her antennae.

And she can taste with the tip of her proboscis, not to mention each foot, which can taste whatever it touches.

A forager can visit flowers up to six miles away from the hive.

For us, that would equal a trip of 800 miles.

It's now 16 days since the old queen left the hive. Time for a new queen to emerge from the royal apartments to replace her.

The first-born stakes her claim to be ruler with a piping call.

But that's not enough to win the throne. She will also have to fight up to a dozen royal sisters.

One possible rival is stung to death through the wall of the brood cell before she can get out.

At the same time, another is trying to free herself from her cell.

The first-born queen must now act quickly if she wants to remain in power. She heads for the brood cell of the second rival.

As soon as the rival is free, the challenge is taken up. She stakes her own claim with an aggressive call.

The battle for the colony begins.

The larger, longer queens are in the center, surrounded by workers.

Each queen tries to sting the other to death, striking as close as possible to the sensitive abdomen.

But this time, quite unexpectedly, the battle ends in a draw.

The stalemate has dramatic consequences. A hive can only have one queen. So the colony must divide yet again.

The departing swarm is on a risky mission. The newborn queen that leads it is a virgin and cannot guarantee the new colony's continued existence.

Thousands of workers follow her nonetheless, drawn inexorably by her scent.

A precipitous flight from the hive can have strange consequences.

If the scout bees have no opportunity to find a suitable home, they may stumble into a dangerous neighborhood, infested by humans and their infernal machines.

The swarm seeks a temporary resting-place.

For bees, home is where the queen is.

Alighting on a live overhead tram wire shows a definite lack of planning.

It could be deadly for the swarm.

But for passers-by, it's just a diversion. Swarming bees have no possessions to protect, and so seldom sting—although they do tend to bring the town to a standstill.

The fire department comes to the rescue.

The firemen have brought with them some expert help, on call for just this kind of emergency. But it's not clear how the beekeepers can get the bewildered colony under control.

As one would expect of firemen, the beekeepers have brought along their own hoses. The cold water has the effect of calming the bees, at least temporarily.

At first, the bees seem to tolerate being shaken into the box. But then they begin to rebel, led by their queen, who has been protected from the effects of the water by layer of loyal followers.

The swarm, with the queen in its midst, rises from the box and continues its journey to a new, unknown destination.

The scouts search for a suitable site for a hive in the nearby woods.

The rotted stump of an old tree seems ideal. A fixer-upper, to be sure, but one with undeniable charm.

The usual inspections are cautious at first, then progressively more confident. So far, so good.

It's empty, it's dry, and it's big enough for the colony. Who could ask for more?

Some food would be nice, too.

Now that the bees have settled in the woods, they search out honeydew, a sticky liquid containing a great deal of sugar, which they can turn into woodland honey.

The honeydew comes from aphids. It's prized by many insects, especially wood ants.

The aphids tap trees to obtain sugary sap, which their bodies turn into honeydew.

The wood ants then massage the aphids with their antennae to stimulate production. They act as shepherds tending their sheep.

An ant lion greedily watches the wood ants' flock. But he'll face stiff resistance.

Some poachers are more imposing than others.

Bears spend almost all of their time foraging for food.

It's best not to attract their attention.

Too late....

The bear is known for its sweet tooth, and a beehive is irresistible.

To reach the prized woodland honey, the bear uses brute force.

But honey is only one of the attractions. He also savors the protein-rich grubs.

The bees desperately defend their hive.

But they're no match for the bear, who shakes off their attacks.

His thick fur protects him from the stinging bees long enough for him to wreak maximum damage.

Only when the hive is devastated does the bear decide it's time to move on.

Other, smaller plunderers begin to arrive.

One bee tries to rescue some honey. She's driven away by the ants.

The colony is doomed.

But the original hive is still very much intact.... As summer heat raises the temperature inside, workers are kept busy bringing in cooling water.

But it's the winter that's the hardest time for the colony. They have only the honey stores set aside in the summer.

All the bees must work hard for the survival of the colony. The drones who didn't mate with the queen / are no longer needed.

They're driven out of the hive to certain death.

The colony must now submit to another indignity. It's time for the beekeeper to take his share of the honey—a kind of rent to cover the cost of the hive and its management.

Anything he spills is public property.

But the rent is invariably reasonable, for the beekeeper wants his bees to survive the winter.

Beekeepers have been harvesting their crop for thousands of years. They have faced ruin from bad weather, predators, and bacterial disease.

And yet, year after year, a new generation of workers has taken to the air, to bring us the taste of honey.
Sweet anticipation....

A hunter. A hunter so strong that it can pull down prey ten times its own weight. So intelligent and capable that primitive man followed it to scavenge from its kills. A hunter which, because of its very success, has now been banished by man to the most remote and barren of wildernesses. The howl of the wolf, the sound of the unknown. And yet, wolves are more familiar to us than we might think. Stone Age people took their pups and tamed them, and all our domesticated dogs are descended from them. Indeed, the very characteristics we most admire in our dogs—loyalty and intelligence and courage—are precisely the characters that the wolf has to have to survive in the wild. And yet, whereas the dog has become man's best friend, the wolf remains one of his most feared enemies. It is time we saw the wolf for what it really is. Northern Canada in winter is a bleak and unpromising land for any hunter. But the wolf is indefatigable. Its senses are so acute that it can interpret what is going on around it with a degree of subtlety that is beyond our imagining. It has a loose-limbed trot that is so effective and economical of energy that it can cover 50 miles in 24 hours, and do so for day after day after day. The raven is a scavenger, and wolves are not above joining it, for the winter brings many casualties—easy meat. Many wolves, for much of the time, operate as a pack. They have such an extraordinary degree of intuition that their understanding of one another's intentions often seems beyond normal explanation. Younger members learn from the older, more experienced ones so that the whole group operates as a unified and highly skilled team. For all of these reasons, human hunters everywhere have admired the wolf. Even today, the native people of the North call it "The Teacher," and honor its special powers with dances. In Europe, when people settled down to farm, the wolf's image changed from deity to devil and fertile imaginations wove frightening legends around it. As farmers cleared the forests, the wolves developed a taste for livestock. The innocent lamb and the savage wolf became powerful symbols which the Church used to demonstrate the existence of Satan. So, wolves were hunted without mercy. Eventually, they were driven out of most of Europe's forests, but an irrational fear of them has remained. It takes huge commitment and great dedication to study wolves. It also takes a lot of air miles.

Wolves are wary and elusive, so we may never know the whole truth about their lives. Fragments of evidence must be pieced together. Wolves can respond intelligently to changing conditions, which keeps wolf biologists guessing.

A fit deer, with all its senses tuned to danger, can usually spot a wolf in time, and escape. The numbers and size of prey animals in any area affect the size of wolf packs. In Northern Minnesota, there are many white-tailed deer and moose, so some packs can be 15-strong. The pack is dominated by an adult pair who are often together for life. Offspring from the previous three years make up the rest of the group. These pups look fully grown, but they're still learning from their parents. Their schooling is long, and their family life intense. Wolf packs are no more than highly organized and mobile nurseries. And it is this extraordinary mobility which makes them so difficult to observe at close range. To get close to a wolf on the ground, you have to be able to think like a wolf, and observe and interpret the same signs that they use in making their decisions. These wolves in Northern Canada are exceptional. They follow and attempt to kill the formidable and massive of all prey animals—buffalo. These buffalo belong to the last of the great herds that once covered the North American grasslands. Wolf packs have shadowed them for thousands of years. Although the wolves here are the largest in the world—Some weigh over 125 pounds—an adult buffalo may weigh over a ton. So, bringing one down is both difficult and dangerous. Snow can sometimes give wolves an advantage. Their splayed paws act like snowshoes, so that they can move over the top of crusted snow in places where other animals would sink into the drifts. To make up for their relatively small size, these wolves rely heavily on teamwork. They move among the buffalo, sizing up the herd, looking for an animal that might be vulnerable, and therefore easier to bring down. The buffaloes stand their ground. If the pack can persuade the herd to move, then the older and weaker animals will become more obvious. The wolves are choosing their moment very carefully, because in each buffalo hunt, they are risking their lives. The wolves' first attack is a test. It will help them to decide whether to back off or whether to build up the pressure. They've selected a possible victim. If they can isolate it from the herd, they will be able to deny it security and food. Day after day, they keep up the pressure. The stress on the buffalo becomes both physical and psychological, draining it of energy and determination. It's a long process. But the wolves are patient. If the wolves are successful, they will have enough meat to last the whole pack for a week. If the buffalo manages to regain the safety of the herd, then the wolves will have to start all over again. Here in the high arctic, members of the pack keep in touch with one another over vast distances. Prey may be widely scattered. Herds of musk ox, for instance, may be tens of miles apart. Arctic wolves have to cover a lot of ground. Often, they are forced to live on smaller prey, such as arctic hare. But hares are alert and quick, and although there are many of them, they are very difficult to catch. They're not much more than a snack for a wolf, and when you're on such short rations, you have no energy to spare. Even if jaegers harass you because you have inadvertently gotten close to their nest, it's not worth the energy to respond. Calories may be short, but relationships are strong. This is the seventh spring that this wolf couple have been together. Ellesmere Island, where these wolves live, is in almost perpetual darkness during the five months of winter. When summer arrives, the thick fur, which helped the wolf survive the bitter cold, becomes an irritation. It's a pleasure to get rid of it. This far north, the summer is very short, so the arrival of young has to be precisely timed. Arctic hares have already produced their babies, and the leverets are busy cropping the new plant shoots. But if the wolves themselves are to breed successfully, their hunting efforts must go up a gear. Wolves have an eloquent body language. The female uses it to persuade the male to go out to find food. There is no stalking cover for the male wolf, and adult hares can easily sprint and bounce out of danger. The leverets tend to lie low. The young hare has speed—but the wolf has stamina. The female wants her share. This tug of war reflects an internal struggle, the battle between a wolf's individual needs and its team spirit. The female wins the hare without too much trouble—which suggests that there's more at stake than this meal. The pair may already have pups hidden away in their den. By keeping her partner hungry, the female forces him to continue his search for food. Further south, the buffalo are also shedding their winter coats and minding their spring calves. The new calves are easier targets for the wolves, but they must still be cautious. Nothing about catching buffalo is easy. The calves may look vulnerable, but they have fiercely protective parents. Again, the wolves get the herd on the run. Instinctively, the calves move to the middle, where they are shielded by the sheer bulk and ferocity of the adults. Buffalo calves can run as fast as their parents, but if the wolves keep the herd moving, the calves will become exhausted. And if one should stumble, it will be left exposed. The wolves have got one. This calf seems doomed. An adult returns to the rescue. The mother, helped by several other adults, tries to shepherd the calf back to the safety of the herd. The calf makes it, but the injuries and shock it has sustained have weakened it. So, the wolves will keep the herd running for many miles yet. Their hunger makes them determined and tenacious. Successful buffalo hunts are rare. It's very difficult for wolves to bring down a fit adult. The best opportunity comes when an animal is weak or already wounded. And this one is. The buffalo makes a break for safety, but its strength is already ebbing away. The wolves' only weapons are their sharp teeth. Killing quickly is not a choice open to them. There has always been a natural and subtle relationship between wolves and buffalo. Human hunters on the plains used to put on wolf skins in order to creep close to the herds. But it wasn't easy even for them to catch one. Horse-power shifted the balance. Native people could now round up the buffalo and kill them in larger numbers. But once the hunters had guns, the buffalo had little chance. European colonizers cleared the land for their cattle and grain—first of buffalo, and then of wolves. Wolves were shot, trapped, and poisoned with fanatical zeal. By the early 1930s, wolves had been exterminated from most of the United States. As in Europe, the wolf became a fugitive, surviving only in places well away from persecution—Places such as this, a remote island off the west coast of Canada, where clear creeks each year fill with salmon. It's a wilderness largely untouched by man. Wolves are extremely adaptable, and here, during the salmon season, they go fishing. As we have learned more about the wolves' way of life, we have come to accept that, like all predators, they are important elements in maintaining the natural balance of the wilderness. Almost from birth, wolf puppies display individual personalities and aptitudes. At three months, they are still too inexperienced to kill large animals, so they are nurtured in a safe place while the older wolves go out hunting. Grovelling and urgent licking by the pups encourages the returning adult to regurgitate the contents of its expandable stomach. Farther south in the United States, some people, increasingly appreciative of wild places, have campaigned for the protection of wolves and a better understanding of their nature. Many people want to re-introduce them into protected land, which is now overrun by deer and elk. The Nez Perce Indians of the Rocky Mountains offered their own tribal lands for the release of 35 wild-trapped wolves.

 In other places, the wolf is not so welcome. Wolves pay no regard to human feelings or boundaries. They travel to where there is food. They may follow other wolf scent for hundreds of miles, or just strike out independently on their own. In the late 1980s, a grey male wolf trotted 250 miles from the Canadian border right into the Nine Mile Valley, the heart of Montana ranching country. Hatred of wolves has a long tradition here.

But wolves have legal protection now. Killing them no longer brings a bounty, but a possible hundred-thousand-dollar fine. Ranching country is hard to police.

Wherever wild prey is dense, they are crossing the Canadian border, trickling back into their former territory. If wolves have enough room to maneuver, they tend to avoid cattle. But if there is a shortage of prey, it's hardly surprising that a wolf will try to take the meat that men are rearing for themselves. Nowhere is this problem greater than in India. It is early July in the state of Maharashtra, and the monsoon is breaking. It is about as hot and humid as a wolf can stand. India is as far south as wolves go. Indian wolves are uncommon, but they are most visible in the rainy season, when they are hunting for their pups as well as for themselves. Wild blackbuck concentrate in large numbers wherever there is new growth, even if it is in the heart of a wolf pack's territory. As in wolf hunts everywhere, the first stage is to identify frailty. Blackbuck are not only fast, they are also extremely agile. Each, as it leaps, is demonstrating its fitness and strength. Maybe their pursuer will choose a weaker neighbor, or get too confused to select a single target. But when the monsoon dries up in September, the blackbuck disperse. The wolves must look elsewhere for food. These fast-growing pups still need feeding. The parents' only choice is to take the villagers' livestock. Local people also have families to support, and they do all they can to protect their herd, using their dogs—domesticated wolves—to help them do so. It's hard for anyone to make a living here. There are few places left for the Indian wolf. In some parts of Europe, wolves have found a way of living close to man. In rural Romania, the pace of change has been relatively slow. The mountain meadows of Transylvania are grazed in much the same way as they have been for centuries. Every evening, shepherds pen their flocks to protect them against wild animals. Just above them, on the upper slopes, is one of the wildest and most extensive tracts of forest left in Europe. Wolves, bears, and lynx live here in substantial numbers. But when shepherds lose occasional lambs, it's the wolf that is usually blamed. To establish the truth of the matter, scientists trapped and radio collared a wild female wolf. Using remote cameras, they were able to monitor the growth of her nine puppies. By June, most of the youngsters were on to solids—regurgitated deer meat, for instance—which she brought back from her hunting trips. A couple of the youngsters still have a taste for her milk. There are good numbers of red deer in her hunting territory, but providing food for ten is a demanding business. However, her patch of forest slopes down to the suburbs and industrial areas of the town of Brasov. Brasov is modernizing fast, but this is Transylvania, and werewolf myths persist to this day. So, the first report of a wolf by the main line to Bucharest were treated as tales told by the gullible. Romanian bed-time stories are as full of evil wolves as elsewhere in Europe. The scientists were skeptical, but when they began tracking the wolf at night, they discovered that they had missed half the story. A starlight-sensitive camera revealed that not only was it a wolf here, but it was behaving in a most surprising fashion. When the night express to Bucharest had passed through, the female wolf carefully crossed the line. Although temporarily limping, probably because of a thorn in her foot, the female was confidently making her way into town. She was clearly streetwise and seemed to be certain of where she was going. By midnight, she had crossed the main drainage canal, and had been joined by a yearling from her pack. They were now on the other side of town, well away from their forest home. When the female headed across waste ground towards the oil refinery, the researchers were struggling to keep up.

The sheep are well-guarded. This must be one of the few places in Europe where shepherds still watch their flocks by night. Their dogs display all the possessiveness of their wolf ancestors. Outnumbered, the female wolf turned back into town. It is now known that she always checks the flocks first for a chance stray, but she finds easier meals in and around the Brasov rubbish bins. Wolves here are simply adapting to a new environment, just as urban foxes have done in English towns. She looks very like another feral dog, and so far, she has evaded unwanted publicity. But it is unlikely that the Brasov residents will remain in the dark for much longer. They will have to decide whether or not to tolerate a wolf in their midst. To survive in the modern world, wolves need our acceptance, as well as physical space. Even in the wildest places, wolves face difficulties. On the barren ground of Ellesmere Island, even suitable places for dens are rare, and the wolves have great problems to solve if they are to raise a family. This pair have two pups. At five weeks old, they are adventurous, but they are far from independent. The female and her mate will have to provide them with food for months yet. Wolf puppyhood is long because there is so much to learn. Vigorous play is an important part of learning new skills, but also helps to strengthen to pups' developing bodies. They will try to suckle as often as possible, but their mother is not always keen to oblige. It is likely that she hasn't had much to eat herself lately, and is simply short of milk. The mother wolf and her pups are showing obvious signs of hunger. To maintain a healthy development, the pups will have to increase their weight by two to three pounds every week. But that will require a regular supply of nourishment. These puppies may be small, but to feed them properly, their parents will need a hunting territory of over a thousand square miles. The male is kept hard at work. The female still does the begging, but gradually, the pups will learn this ritual for themselves. The male seems reluctant to deliver the meal. No doubt he is hungry too, but the female cannot accompany him and help on long hunts until the pups are a bit older. The pups wolf down their food, simply because they can never be sure of their next mouthful. As the days lengthen, so do the leverets' chances of survival. They are faster now, and smarter. Wolves rarely live beyond nine years in the wild. The male wolf may already be thirteen. So, although he's exceptional, he's well past his prime. On days when he is unsuccessful, the female collects food from her store—leverets that were killed and buried earlier in the year, when they were easier to catch. But if his family is to survive, the male cannot give up the hunt. Wolves are the experts at chasing and collecting moving objects, and this exercise is far more critical than retrieving a ball. Today is a good day. The male has brought back two hares and readily gives up one to the female. But her urge to feed her pups is overwhelming. It's a hard life, but if the male's bloodline is to survive, then pups' future comes first. In seven seasons, this wolf couple have raised only three offspring to maturity, and the prospects for the current family are by no means certain. Already, one pup is quicker to take advantage of the incoming meal. It's a critical advantage, for it will give the most vigorous pup a head start when the long arctic winter begins to close in. The den provides some shelter, but the weather is not the problem. There may just not be enough food to go around. If the pups survive until the spring, the parents will have done unusually well. Wolves have had to be tenacious. Not only do they endure some of the harshest conditions on earth, but they also have survived bitter hostility from humanity. Their methods, especially when hunting, may shock us deeply. But they aren't given meat out of tins and packets, as our dogs are. A wolf can only be a wolf. They remain wary and unknowable. But steadily, they are winning back our respect. Even the howl of the wolf, that once struck terror into our hearts, is now regarded by many as one of the most thrilling sounds of the natural world. In August these days, hundreds of Canadians make a pilgrimage into the wilderness to make contact with wolves. A road, cutting through the remote forests of spruce and fir, provides a good place to stand and listen for this wild music. These listeners have no chance of actually seeing a wolf. But National Park rangers know how to communicate with the legendary outlaw who, for centuries, we have tried to destroy.